What is today's date?
The seventh.
Thank you.
I call this meeting of the South Portland City Council to
order on April 7,
2026. May I have a motion to move
into executive session?
So moved.
Councilor Pride, so moved. Seconded.
All in favor? Thank you very much.
Good
evening, everyone. I'm calling this meeting of the South
Portland City Council to order on April 7,
2026. Please stand if you wish to,
to pledge allegiance to the Republic that is the United
States.
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of
America, and to the Republic for which it stands,
one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty
and justice for all.
Madam Clerk, may I have a roll call, please?
Councilor Pride?
Here.
Councilor Matthews?
Councilor West?
Here.
Councilor Coleman?
Councilor Walker?
Here.
Councilor Scott?
And Mayor Tipton.
Here, thank you very much.
Councilor Matthews is not able to be with us this evening
and sends his regrets.
Are there any additions or corrections to our minutes?
Seeing no objection, we'll pass those minutes by unanimous
consent. Thank you.
Okay, sorry. My computer decided to
be a little fussy with me.
All right.
Before we move to petitions and communications, I think we were going
to, without objection
anyway, reorder our agenda slightly.
And that would be that we would take our workshop
discussion, which is currently agenda item I,
and move that before action on old and new
business,
which is currently H.
Councilors, any objection to doing so?
The reason behind that is, as you'll see, the first order of old and new
business has to do with the charge of the Mahoney City Center, and it
felt like it could be useful to have our discussion time ahead of that.
No objection? All right, we'll make that change.
All right. I think we are now on petitions and
communications. Thank you, city clerk and city manager.
So the petition and communication that we have this evening is just a final call
for our '26 to '28 election clerks.
We will be moving forward with applications to appoint these individuals at
our next April meeting on the 21st.
So there is still time, if individuals want to assist with
elections, to fill out an application.
It is not a guarantee that you'll work every election for the next two years,
but it is something that is important if you did want to participate to fill out
your application now for consideration.
And that's all.
Thank you very much. Thank you for managing this process.
It's an important one.
All right.
On our appointment calendar, if there are no objections, we will postpone
that to our next business meeting date.
Any objections? No? It is postponed.
Before we move to our consent calendar, the clerk is going to read the
rules for public comment. Thank you.
Members of the public are invited to comment on any topic, on or off the agenda
during citizen discussion part one or part two for up to three minutes.
If you are here to speak on a topic appearing on tonight's agenda, you are
encouraged to wait until this item comes up on the agenda, where you will have
three minutes to speak. If you are unable to wait, you may speak on the matter
during citizen discussion part one.
However, you will not be permitted to speak on the topic again.
Members of the public who speak on a topic when it comes up on the agenda may not
speak on the topic again during citizen discussion part two.
We ask all speakers to state their name and address for the record.
Sorry, I just was looking at the consent calendar-
You can continue
... and thinking how long it is. Yes, please do.
Order
562526. Board of Health for Dr. Tobias
Nichols as the physician seat is City Council appointment for a term that expires
December 2nd, 2028.
The order number 702526, Affordable Housing Committee for David
Cohen at the owner seat for District IV for a term that expires
on December 30th, 2028.Order 95
for Landcare Management Advisory Committee, Steven Brooks for the
landscaping licensed professional member for an at-large
appointment for a term that expires on January 30th, 2029.
Order 1312526 for planning board for Donald Ladd for
District Four for a term that expires March 31st, 2029.
And as I switch computers to continue,
we have order 1322526 for planning board for Cooper Bramble for
District Five for a term that expires on March 31st,
2029.
Order 1332526
for Conservation Commission for David Cohen for District Four for an unexpired
term that expires on March 2nd, 2028.
Order
1712526
amending the city board and committee policy with regards to our new agenda
management system.
Order 1722526, the acceptance of
2026 highway speed grant in the amount of
$13,400.
Order 1732526, acceptance of the state grant
award of $15,000 for housing regulated zoning
amendments.
Order 1742526, award of bid number
1826 for pool deck flooring at the South Portland Community Center in
the amount of $40,228 from the fiscal year
'26 CIP budget.
Order 1752526, approving the agreement between the City
of South Portland and SMCC for maintenance of the Shoreway Trail.
All items read on the consent calendar this evening require a majority vote.
Thank you very much. A long list today.
Are there any counselors who wish to remove an item from the consent calendar?
I don't see any. I think we're going to open up
consent calendar items for public comment.
This is not yet our open public comment.
Any members of the public commenting on the consent calendar?
Okay, I don't see any.
I just wanted to make one comment, which is that it's great to see all of those
appointments to committees, and thank you to all the people who are willing to
serve.
All right.
So, do we have a motion to pass the consent calendar,
counselors?
Coleman, and then seconded by Walker. All in favor?
All right. Thank you very much. That was a unanimous vote.
And now is the time for our first public comment period, the
open public comment period with the rules that our city clerk has already
announced. Thank you.
Come on down if you've got a comment.
Good evening. My name's Tim Honey.
I live at 215 High Street, South Portland, and I
want to speak on Order 178,
which is sort of late in the evening, and so I thought I would
speak at this public hearing on it.
I want to
thank the council for taking this up, and I want to
urge you to unanimously
pass this.
This is a letter that is being directed by the city
to the
DEP on the High
Street tank farm and the future
of that tank farm, and whether or not they should get a
renewal license.
And I think you have made some really, really good points
in the letter that was in the
package, and I thank you for that. And we
at Toss the Tanks have
moved out, and we are calling. They're going to be acting on
this at the end of April. We're
asking the DEP to
hold off on renewing it until all the issues have been
raised, and if they can't renew it, then they shouldn't
pass it. And
I think it's an uphill battle that we have on
this, and it's quite interesting
because the Portland Pipeline and their parent
company
Suncor,
have been operating at only 3% capacity,
and they've been doing this ever since Suncor
bought the facility. So they're not
fulfilling their original mission of moving oil up
to Canada,
and having it go be refined up there.
And
they're operating at 3%, and you got to wonder why.
And I think the reason why is because
the state law and the regulations that they
have put in place to administer it
allow if you get a license, a five-year
renewal of your license, you do not have to
address the remediation of the property.
And it's a license to renew. They're not renewing.
They're operating at 3%. So
I'm not optimistic that
we're going to be successful, but I think in the long run,
we're going to see that
why would they keep it going at
3%? It doesn't make any sense.
You have 20 seconds.
I thank you for listening to my presentation, and please
pass this letter tonight. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
All right, more public comment.
Well, I see you, but I see someone approaching.
I know you to be the efficient person that you are.
Well, come on up then. Run.
Hello, my name is Dave Hebert.
I'm
here to talk about
Wilbur Smith Associates.
I submitted a study at the Comprehensive Plan Committee.
No, I didn't submit the study. I made a comment, and I think I
gave a copy
of maybe a screenshot or something from them.
And it had to do with the capacity of the Broadway-Waterman
intersection. This was in
2001.
It was 30% beyond capacity.
That was in 2001.
It projected to 2025, that is
68% beyond
capacity.
It got thrown out by the Comprehensive Plan Committee because
they couldn't find out where Wilbur Smith Associates
was,
or who they were,
or I couldn't
understand what was going on. In fact, I wasn't there
because
I
think I was called names. And anyway,
they said it was fictitious
and from an unreliable source. But Wilbur Smith Associates
is a global consulting firm.
They were taken by
CDM. In fact, you folks should have the
copies in your email right now. They were
purchased by CDM,
and they're now called CDM
Smith.
And they're a consulting firm that the DOT uses.
They've done much work
for the state of Maine.
I don't know how much more solid a source
that the Comprehensive Plan Committee needed.
This is a really, really valuable piece of document.
Because it's the only one that quantifies
the most difficult intersection in this city.
It's the pinch point for Broadway.
It's what dictates whether Broadway's going to flow or not.
I can understand-
30 seconds
I cannot tell you how frustrated I am.
I've been going through this stuff for two and a half years now.
Anyway,
take that, do the math. It was projected at 29%
growth. Figure out our growth now, and you have the real number for that capacity.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Do we have someone else for public comment, open
public comment? It will only be open for so long.
Please come to the podium.
Counselors, Jeff Steinbring, Cottage Road.
A week or so ago, I was driving back home from Cape Elizabeth.
It was dark, but it wasn't late, and I had Shore Road all to
myself, or I thought I did. Then there were blue
lights flashing behind me, and the next thing I knew, I was talking
about speeding with a Cape Elizabeth police officer.
He was patient, and professional, and forbearing, even though
he'd caught me red-handed, and even when he discovered while we were at
it
that my inspection sticker was out of date.
While these infractions
aren't to be made light of, they don't make me much of a
criminal. They certainly don't place me among the, quote, "worst
of the worst," unquote.
And yet, these offenses of mine make me far worse
than the vast majority of our neighbors who were arrested
and shipped away by ICE and Border Patrol agents
during January's Operation Catch of the Day.
During the five days of that miserable surge,
those miserable agents arrested 190 people in
Maine, of whom
only 11 had a record of criminal conviction, and
only 20% of whom had any involvement at all, like
mine, with the law.
11 out of 190.
That kind of orchestrated abuse of authority isn't law
enforcement. It's bullying, intimidation, and
a wholesale disregard for the law.
But here's how our own government still describes it on its Homeland
Security website. Quote, "Operation Catch of the Day
is to target the worst of the worst criminal illegal aliens in the
state of Maine. Under President Trump, we are no longer
allowing criminal illegal aliens to terrorize American
citizens."These are
lies. Our own experience of the past three months has taught
us that if anyone's been terrorized here, it's us.
It's our community, and especially those immigrant members of our
community who are the target of these lies.
We knew this worst of the worst talk was a lie from the beginning.
We knew because DHS bragged openly
that they intended to, quote, "Remove one million
immigrants a year for four years."
30 seconds.
There's no way to do that without ruining the lives of,
say, 190 people when all but, say, 11 of
them have done nothing at all wrong.
It was good of us South Portlanders to offer the resistance as we did.
It was wrong of us not to offer more.
Of course, I speak as much of myself here as of anyone else in this
room or in our community. Should we be tested again,
though, we must act from the start with the full knowledge that
it's among-
Time
... those federal bullies, not among our neighbors, that we are likely to
find the worst of the worst.
Thanks.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else have a comment to make?
Okay. I'm going to make just one
announcement, which is that
for anyone who is here to discuss the school
presentation of their budget and is
therefore waiting for that agenda item, the
schools don't have a budget yet, so they won't be making the
presentation.
So if that was your plan and you still want to make those comments, now is
your opportunity.
All right.
Well,
hello.
Then we're going to
close... I'm just going to say one thing, sir, because you walked in
just as I was announcing. The schools are not presenting tonight,
so if by any chance you're here and you had counted on the schools presenting and
making comments during that item, we won't have that item, so now would
be your chance. Now you heard everything everybody else heard.
Thank you.
All right. Open public comment is closed.
We're going to move on to public hearings and action.
First item, order number 176-25-26, granting Tres Leches
Cakes 4 at 863 Broadway a food establishment with
liquor license. Passage requires a majority vote.
As a quick summary of this, this is an existing business in our community, and they
are simply looking to expand to include alcohol at their establishment.
They have provided their application, have received state approval,
and we have not received any public comment or concern.
Councilors, any questions on this item right now?
Nope, don't see any. All right. Public comment on this item is
open.
Councilors, Pedro Vasquez. My comments are directed to you as a
private citizen. I want to commend you for
awarding this opportunity to our friends and neighbors at Tres Leches.
I also want to take a minute and highlight what my dear brother, Jeff
Steinbrink, has brought to
the room tonight.
Tres Leches, I also want to highlight, is
one of the immigrant-owned businesses that was targeted by these
bullies. They camped out in front of their establishment
as soon as they made entry into our community, and they sat there.
It was only through the courage and the hope and the
support of the neighbors
in the community coming forward and advising that that was
happening, that we were able to
safeguard the safety of our friends and neighbors.
They are not here tonight to express their gratitude because they're a
small business that has to stay open, and this is their busy hour,
so they've asked me to come and say thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you very much.
Oh, looks like we have another comment on the item.
Charlie Teenie, Pleasant Dale. I just want to say I support this too.
I'm a neighbor and very much appreciate the food in
there.
Good to know. Thank you.
Can I add one thing? They're going to be having margaritas as a result of this
license.
Okay.
At least now, during the summer, and have some authentic Mexican
margaritas.
We're going to have to start making a product placement charge part
of our meetings.
Would anyone else like to comment on this item?
All right. Thank you very much.
Councilors, do we have a motion for
passage of this order? So moved by Councilor West. Do we have a second?
Oh, we have a team fighting for a second.
Come on, who's going to win over there?
I defer.
I'll second.
All right. Thank you, Councilor Scott. Councilor Walker.
Nope. No, actually, I'm West.
West.
I mean...
Who am I? Who's on first? Et cetera.
I would also like to say I really appreciate having Tres Leches in our community.
I was very sad to see them closed for those times, those days
when ICE was
present,
and
I wish them all the very best.
Thank you very much.
Councilor...
Scott.
Council-- I'm just going to call you all councilor since I can't seem to remember
anyone's name.
It's totally fine. No, I have loved this restaurant.
My son
goes there every time, and we spend a lot of money on his plates of
food-
... that never seem to satisfy him, except that it's amazing.
So I'm very excited to see this, very excited that it's still here and still
successful and I think brings a vibrancy to Broadway
and to our community that is very much appreciated,
so.
Go forth and conquer.
Excellent. Anyone else?
I'll just make the comment that I recently learned what are the tres
leches in the cake. Evaporated,
condensed, and regular milk.
Yep.
Think it is important to note that.
Yes.
All right.
Go try some.
Councilors, do we have a vote to approve?
All in favor?
All six councilors here, it's a unanimous vote. Thank you so much.
All right, Madam Clerk.
Well, it's actually Mr. City Manager.
I think we're going to hear from you-
Yes
... right now. Thank you.
So the next item on public hearing is our presentation from the city manager
for the proposed fiscal year 2027 budget.
Okay. Mayor, councilors.
Once again, presentation of the city's annual budget, and as you heard
before, the school department tentatively will be presenting
their share of the budget, not tonight, but next week.
So two quick updates before I dive in.
Start with some good news. There is a lower tax rate increase than
we initially had projected. We updated some of the valuation numbers
due to new growth. This has nothing to do with
revaluations. This is actual new building, new construction.
And that means that instead of a 6% overall tax rate increase, it's now
at 5.1%. Of course, the final valuation number from the
assessor is never known until late July, sometimes August, sometimes
September, after they finish up their valuation work.
But unless money's added to the budget, the tax rate won't increase from that and
may actually decrease because there's more value that's found.
Second, in this presentation, the school budget numbers have been updated
as of March 23rd, so two weeks ago.
That's actually more up to date than what is in the budget books
that you all have, so I'm going to be referring to those numbers.
Of course, the school board hasn't actually voted yet to
approve a budget to send to the council, so that's also to be
taken with a grain of salt.
I always like to start this presentation to show what the trends are for
city services, what are the demands, what's the public
seeking, asking for. And as you'll see in just
about every category, the response is
sometimes flat, but often up. So for example, our
police department last year responded to 32,234
calls. That's up 20% from 2023.
It includes nearly 7,600 traffic stops
and nearly 700 calls involving mental health and
behavioral health liaisons. Our fire department responded to
5,742 calls. That's up 5.2% from
2023, and they also completed
1,206 life safety inspections, up
125% from the year before.
Our library users borrowed 16% more physical books than they
did two years ago, borrowed 62% more e-books and
digital books than they did last year, and there were 21% more
visitors who attended one or more programs at the library than they
did the year before.
My favorite or maybe least favorite one, city staff
received over 3.1 million emails.
That is up 55% from 2023. There are just
a lot of people emailing for service now.
Our IT helpdesk resolved nearly 6,900 tickets and
phone support issues. That's up 17% from the prior year.
Public works responded to 712 online work orders, up
34% from two years ago. They repaired 103
streetlights, similar to 2023.
They responded to 57 more traffic signal complaints,
40 overnight storms year to date. That's up
38% from the same period two years ago, and they repaired
119 potholes. That's actually down from last year.
However, it doesn't mean that they decided to not fix
potholes. It means that many of the ones that they repaired, they
didn't just do a cold patch on, they fixed the
underlying issue so they are no longer potholes.
Our finance department processed over 16,000 vehicle
registrations. That's up 23% over the past three years.
Economic development tracked over 200 projects
during the course of the year. Our water resource protection plant
pumped and treated 1.75 billion gallons of
wastewater. That's actually down from 2.1 billion the
year before. But they treated and disposed of 4,900
tons of sludge, which is up 2.1% from
2024. They also cleaned nearly 2,800 catch basins,
and that prevented about 266 tons of sediment from entering
local water sources.
Code enforcement issued nearly 2,000 permits.
That's up 3% from two years ago. Our planning department
presented 15 ordinance changes,
ordinance amendments, and processed 59 applications.
That's down 36% from 2023. It should be noted
that things like ADUs moved to code-only review,
however. This fiscal year to date, our
SPCTV crew broadcast and streamed 92 meetings.
That's up 26% from the same time last year, and they produced
28.2% more productions
during that same period as wellWrapping up here, our
sustainability office engaged with over 1,800 residents through different
events like the Repair Fair, Earth Day, Swap Series, and
13,000 residents through sustainability programs like the
Swap Shop, which averages 101 visits per day, the Resilient
Yards program, and the electric tool library, which had
360 checkouts last calendar year, up 11%
from 2023.
Our social service office processed 1,319
applications for general assistance.
That's down 24% from 2024, but still
up 57% from 2019. You all may recall,
during COVID, we had a pretty big spike with the hotels being filled,
and the economic situation there.
But as those hotels dissipated,
the numbers
did as well, but still up significantly from
pre-COVID times.
And last but not least, Parks and Rec.
Our park rangers spent over 1,000 hours in parks and ran 98
educational programs that had over 3,000 participants.
Our senior center hosted over 3,400 visitors and held 25
classes and workshops. Our all-girls sports camp maxed out
at 45 participants. That's up 255% from
2023. And over 17,000
patrons used the indoor walking track at the community center, and over
27,000 participants took part in our adult and youth open
gyms.
So the conclusion remains that resident demand for and use of city
services is strong and increasing.
With that in mind, the budget was prepared with three primary objectives.
To, one, continue to provide the high-quality public services that our
community expects, two, to address council's adopted goals
for 2026, and three, minimize the impact on taxpayers
and submit a budget that falls within the guidance given by city council.
So for that first objective, our FY27 budget,
it's kind of plain. It maintains current level of service while making
limited operational adjustments
necessary to remain within the guidance that you all had provided a few months
back.
While many new positions could be justified, none of the eight new
positions that were requested by departments are included in this
budget to help address objective number three regarding the tax
rate. And in fact, three positions, two full-time, one
half-time, have been cut in the proposed budget.
Addressing your goals for 2027, several goals weren't
necessarily applicable to budget. Some were.
Many are addressed in the capital improvement budget, where there's funding for
initial implementation of the comprehensive plan,
as well as several related master plans, as a goal of the
council was to see those plans implemented.
Another goal was to do more outreach, support outreach to
residents with information. So in addition to the tax bill
insert that we send late summer to all taxpayers, we have
funding for one additional informational mailing that we'd send probably sometime
around January or February, containing additional
information about things going on in the city.
This is a very small attempt to make up for the loss of "The Century," which, as
we all know, was a source of information about city ongoings
for quite a bit of the population.
Our budget does continue to offer the tax rebates to several housing
developers that are providing affordable housing.
In addition, the Affordable Housing Committee has requested half a million dollars
to be placed in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
Objective three, minimize the impact on taxpayers and submit a budget within
guidance given by the council. So at that February workshop, you told the
city, shoot for a 3% to 5% tax
increase, with many councilors closer to that middle number of
4%, and your guidance to the school was between 3% to 6%.
So the municipal share of the tax rate increase is 3%, which is
at the low end of council guidance.
The proposed overall taxes to be raised when factoring in city,
school, county, and metro, is up 69 cents.
Again, that's a 5.1% increase.
And so that's another way we help to meet council's
goal.
We also didn't fund any new positions, as your guidance was not to fund
any that couldn't be offset with...
Or at least positions that couldn't be offset with other expenses or new revenues
were not funded.
So starting off in our process, when we accounted for the fixed
costs, electricity,
fuel, all those things, and initial department budget requests,
it would have resulted in just the city's share of the budget
alone, an increase to the tax rate of 70 cents or
14.5% increase on our portion of the tax
rate. So that translates, when you look at the overall tax rate, that
in and of itself would have been a 5.1% increase.
Again, not including county, metro, or school, and we knew that was definitely
not something that was acceptable.
Some of the cost drivers did include those eight new positions that had been
requested. There's $1.3 million in wage increases due to
union contracts, COLA increases, et cetera, a
10% jump in health insurance,
$76,000
increase in electricity costs, over $150,000
increase in waste disposal and recycling,
contractual expenses, and even our dispatch costs were up
over $62,000. So that's kind of some of the drivers that we
face going into the budget.our budget review.
So that meant in order to get to a tax increase that was no greater than
4%, we needed to find nearly 3.45
million in cuts or new revenues to get there. So how'd we do that?
Well, it effectively worked out. We didn't intend it this way, but
we split the baby, so to speak. There was about 1.7 million
in increased revenue, so we got some great news
about state revenue sharing, an additional 1.35 million.
We'll talk about that a little bit more later.
Our investment income is doing well, so well that we conservatively
thought we could bump that up by 100,000 in excise tax
revenue. Folks keep buying cars and trucks, and so
we felt comfortable inching that up by $200,000 as well.
So all those things and others totaled that 1.7, and we
also reduced costs by 1.7 million.
That was not funding the eight new positions. That saved over 700,000.
We eliminated two and a half existing positions, which saved about
$160,000, and we were unable to
purchase one new PD patrol vehicle, which saved about
$75,000,
in addition to several other
cuts that were made.
So overall, when you look at all that, if you look at the general fund, which is
comprised of the school, municipal, county, and metro budget,
the enterprise fund, which in our case is the sewer budget, and then special
revenue funds, which is golf, SPCTV.
All of those in total are up 7 million to
$147,716,535.
That's a 5% increase in spending overall.
When you look at just the general fund share of those expenses, the school
accounts for 55% of the expenses,
municipal 42, county and metro 3%.
But this is a lot different than how tax dollars are
allocated, and we'll talk about why in just a minute here.
As I said before, the municipal budget's kind of plain.
There's not a lot exciting in it. It was in many ways a status quo budget,
just given the budget circumstances that the city faces, including
the impending building needs. We were able to do some good things in it,
however. We increased the senior property tax relief program
again. Council significantly increased that over the years, so that's
another increase to provide more assistance to
qualifying seniors.
There's some investment in cybersecurity that we're making.
We've been doing a really good job of that over the years, and
we're going to continue with even more this year.
We have a $9,000 grant match programmed in to help with home energy
assessments for low-income homeowners to help
them audit and find ways to save money on their energy bills.
Continued funding for a modest board and committee recognition event in line with
council's goal of
providing support to committees.
There's some bumps in temporary staffing across recreation, youth
program, camps, and senior program budgets to
maintain availability and competitive wages for staff in those
areas.
Some cases even offer expanded service, such as no-cost or
low-cost programming for seniors.
And then we talked about that mailer that's being added to help provide
better information to the public.
Wanted to highlight new this year, committee
requests. They used to appear in the department in which
their committee liaison worked, so planning board would
appear in the planning budget.
That all changed this year. Council updated its policy, and so now
all operating requests from committees, and those requests have to be
$2,500 or less, those show up in the council's budget.
I can still review those and make recommendations. I've reviewed all of them.
I recommend full funding that each of them requested, and so that is
in the budget proposal.
Another category was created this year called special request item.
These are for one-time and/or non-operating items.
They're not limited to $2,500.
I don't review these per the policy, and they're also not automatically included in
the budget. They're something that during the budget workshops, you all
will have to determine whether or not they're something you want to add into the
budget. And I won't get into the details now, although they are in your budget
books, but we've had five committees request
$560,000 in combined special requests,
and so you'll, on the 28th, when you talk about your council department budget,
we'll provide guidance on those.
So let's talk about revenues and expenses.
So revenues, when we're looking at new growth and non-property tax
revenues,
we're estimating right now $20 million in new growth.
That means about $270,000 in new tax
revenue. A bulk of that goes to the school department.
The city gets to keep a smaller amount to put towards
the costs that are increasing to help keep the tax rate
down. Significantly this year, though, it's the other sources of revenue that
are up 12.8%, or $2.9 million. And again, the biggest
one there is state revenue sharing.
And actually, I guess maybe here I'll talk about that.
So state revenue sharing, just quickly, because this is important, it's
broken into two components, Rev 1 and Rev 2.
Rev 1, essentially everybody gets.
Rev 2 is only given to communities that
have high mill rates, or it has to be at a
certain amount or above. And for the past several years,
to the surprise of some, I'm sure, South Portland's mill rate has been below that
threshold. So we have gotten $0 in Rev 2,
while other communities with higher tax rates have gotten
higher amounts. This year, for the first time in several years, we
barely squeaked over that mark and we qualified for Rev
2, and that's about $820,000.
That's great news this year, but if next year our tax rate doesn't go
up enough to whatever the state adjusts it to next year, we lose all of
that. So that's just a caution I'll also talk about later.
But for this year, it's a good shot in the
arm.Our fund balance is another
source of revenue. It's the difference between total city assets and
liabilities. And a component of that fund balance is
unassigned, which means there's been no use assigned
to it, and there's no restrictions on those dollars.
Our policy says that in our unassigned fund balance, we need
to have between 9% to 12% of whatever the next
year's budget is going to be. So if it's a $100 million
budget, we need 9% to 12% of whatever that
number is to be kept in fund balance.
Any amounts over that 12% can be, and are, used
for one-time expenditures such as capital improvement projects.
So this year, as of June 30th of 2025, our unassigned fund
balance stood at 23.8 million. That's
18.7% of the proposed budget
expenditures. So that gave us a pretty big cushion between
the 12% and the 18.7 to use for
operating and capital budget purchases.
So how did we use it this year?
In our FY27 budget, we're using 250,000 towards
the operating budget. Essentially what that does is it buys down the tax rate a
little bit.
We've been using less and less
for that purpose over the past several years.
So for example, that amount is 29% less than this current budget
year and 74% less than it was in FY23.
We're also using 300,000 for a one-time budget expense.
That's some of the more appropriate uses of fund balance because
it's a one-time use of funds, then next year there's no expense, and therefore
there's no expectation that fund balance covers that expense.
And then we were able to use just over $3 million towards our
CIP. So that totaled just about $4 million.
In addition, our finance director has set aside $3
million as an anticipated loan to the school
department, due to an anticipated budget overage that they'll
have to close out this current budget year.
So there's
overages that we're preparing for of about 2 million in their
operating budget and about 1 million in their food service budget.
So again, about 3 million. We hope that's a high estimate, but
that's what we've plugged in there as can't spend because the
school will run out of their own fund balance, and then the only
other source is to dip into ours.
So that all brings our balance down to 17.1 million.
So that means we're at 12.8% of our proposed expenditures.
And I probably won't talk about it now, but maybe I will because I don't know if I
do later. But one of the important reasons that we are actually
recommending staying above that 12% is because
next year when we go into the capital budget season, if
first of all, if council increases the budget, let's say, "Hey, school go ahead and
spend more." That 9% to 12% range goes up, right?
And so we're at 12.8% now, but if the school budget went up
enough, for example, that might now only be 12%.
So we've got to give ourselves a little wiggle room.
The second reason would be
next year we need a base for purchases of CIP
items. We deferred a number of purchases this year because we set that $3
million aside. Next year we're going to have to
consider funding those and a whole bunch of new items that we'll talk
about when we talk about the CIP, and so we need some seed money
there to fund those items because there's never a guarantee of how much
we're going to turn back at the end of this fiscal year.
It might not be enough to fund... Well, it definitely won't be enough to fund
everything, but it might not be enough to fund a significant enough amount.
So when you look at our expenses, it's really four departments that make up about
70% of the budget. Police accounts for about
20%, fire about 19%, public work 17%, parks and rec
13%,
and then throw in debt for 4%. That means all other departments or
budget line items take up about 30% of the budget or about,
what's that? Maybe a percent and a half each
of the budget. So you could see where the city's priorities are by where those
dollars are allocated.
In terms of what budget categories are spent on, as you can imagine,
two-thirds of our costs are personnel, wages, benefits.
That's really what we are. We're a people business.
We're a service sector
entity. And
the next closest expense amount is contractual, which is only
at 13%.
So how do we calculate then what we need from taxes?
So
the amount we need to raise from taxes is a math formula.
What are your expenses? Subtract your non-property tax
revenue, and that gives you the total need from property taxes or your tax
commitment. So you do that for the school, for the municipal
budget, for the county assessment, and the metro assessment.
And so all told there, you're looking at just over
138 million in expenses. There's about
41.6 million in non-property tax revenues, and
that means you have 96.4 million in
needs from property taxes, and that's a 5% increase
from last year.
So how do you calculate the tax rate?
Well, you take that 96.4 million that you need to raise in
taxes, and you divide it by your community's total
taxable value. So in South Portland's case, we're
estimating just over 6.7 billion, and that gives you
the 0.01434. You multiply that by 1,000,
that gives you a mill rate of 1434.
Final number, again, won't be determined until the assessor completes his work in
hopefully late July.
So here are the individual components of the tax rate.
It's made up of the school, the municipal, the county, and the metro share.
So
I like to point out this distinction each year.
So let's look at the municipal current tax rate is
$4.67 out of the overall 1365
tax rate. So we're looking at a 14 cent
increaseUp to 481. So that
jump from 467 to 481 is a 3% increase.
So that's where we live within the council's guidance, and actually, it
was originally 4%, but because of the new budget values that we found,
it's now only 3%. But the impact on the tax rate itself, so
that 13.65 number, a 14-cent increase is only
1%. So the actual impact on what someone's going to pay in taxes
is 1% more due to the city's budget.
It's 3.6% more as the school's budget currently
stands, and then between county and metro, it's just under 0.5%
for, again, that total increase of 5.1%.
So when you pay $100, every $100 of the property tax bill that
you pay, the school gets $61.70, the municipal
share of the budget gets $33.50, and the county and metro gets $4.80.
Let's focus in just on that $33.50 that the
municipality gets.
Here's where that
$33.50
goes. So $7.40 to police, $6.20 to
public works, $5.70 to fire, $2.90 to parks and rec,
$2.30 to debt, and then all other 17 departments
share in $9.
What does this all mean for the average homeowner?
So the average valued home in South Portland is
456,100. That's a $315
increase if you don't have the homestead, up to 6,540.
If you do have the homestead, it's a $297 increase, up to
6,182.
So based on that, let's say you don't get the homestead, the average tax bill of
6,540,
just over 4,000 goes to the school, just under 2,200 goes to the
municipal share of the budget, $262 goes to
the county, and $52 goes to metro.
Another way to look at this, of the 2,191 that the city gets from
that tax bill, here's what
you pay for each department, and it starts from the
police at 489 to public works at 407 to fire to
378, all the way down to city council, $20,
legal budget 11, and poor Jessica is there at 10
o'clock, $10 bringing up the rear.
Tax rate comparison. So,
whether taxes are too high or too low or just right is obviously a
subjective thing for all individuals.
But there are several objective measures that can help us determine whether our tax
rate and our tax increases are consistent with or out of sync
with other communities and metrics.
And so there's five different things I like to look at each year.
Not any one of these things is the end-all be-all, but when you look at all
five of them in
aggregate, it helps to paint a pretty good picture.
And so the first one is the consumer price index.
It's a way to measure inflation. We use the CPI-U Northeast.
The CPI's changed in different regions of the
country. That one is most relevant to South Portland.
In 2025, that was 3.2%. Our
proposed 5.1 tax rate increase is higher than that
CPI-U Northeast.
When you compare us to abutting communities, so the FY26 tax
rate, our tax rate is $1.12 higher than the
average of the four abutting communities, Cape, Portland, Scarborough,
and Westbrook. So you'll see only Westbrook is higher than ours.
The other three communities are lower.
However, this is why the tax rate doesn't tell the whole story.
Our median tax bill is over 10% lower than the
average tax bills of those communities.
So you can see that aside from Westbrook, all those other communities
have higher median tax bills. So Westbrook, with the highest tax
rate, has the lowest median tax bill.
So again, that all is due to the value of the median
home in those communities.
When you look at the tax commitment, so going through that process of
what are your expenses minus non-property tax revenues, what do you need to
raise in taxes. So I compare to when I started here in
FY18, how much has our needs from
taxes changed over that time compared to our
abutting peers of Westbrook, Scarborough, Portland, and Cape.
Out of comparing to all that, we rank the lowest for the percent change in
property taxes raised. We're 4.5 to
20.3 percentage point less than our
abutters. You can see we're kind of close to Scarborough, Portland, a little bit
to Cape, and then Westbrook is much higher than ours.
But we are the lowest.
When you compare us to the 10 largest communities in Maine,
again, why the tax rate doesn't tell the whole story, our tax rate is
$3.70 lower than the average. It's the third
lowest out of all these communities.
But when you look at the median tax bill,
it's $645 higher, 11.6%, we're the
fifth highest or right in the middle.
And again, that has to do with the value of the median
home.
The final way to look at this is a full value tax rate.
This is a
exercise done by the state that helps you really better
compare communities' tax rates to one another because not everyone
assesses at the same percentages.
It values their properties at the same percentage, et cetera.
So this tries to equalize for that.So when you compare South Portland's full
value tax rate of 1320 in this case, this is 2024
data, the most recent they had. You compare that to the average of all communities
in Cumberland County. We're $1.42 less than the average of all
communities in Cumberland County, and we're $1.84 less than the average
of all communities in Maine.
So what does this tell us? Well, the scorecard shows five checks in the green,
meaning we're lower than
the metric
that we're looking at, and three red checks, meaning there's three areas where
we're higher. So
I would conclude from this that overall, our tax bills are in line
with other communities, and there's been an ongoing mindfulness to keep the mill
rate in check over the years.
One last thing, I added this slide last year.
We often hear how come taxes have to go up every year?
Why they never stay flat, how come?
My answer to that is nothing ever stays flat.
Everything we're paying for over the past eight years, the tax commitment's
gone up 40%. Your Netflix subscription has gone up
80%. If you want to buy a pickup truck, it's now 43% more expensive.
Eggs are 124% more expensive. A two-liter of Pepsi is
77%. Happy Meal, 43%. So
yes, we do try to limit what we need to raise in
taxes each year, but all of these things get more expensive for the
city, and unless there's an articulated,
desire to reduce a certain service,
beyond what's currently there,
and there's not other revenues that increase at a significant
amount enough to offset those increases in expenses,
then property taxes unfortunately need to increase,
but just like pretty much everything else is increasing.
I do want to say in 2026, we've had a little bit of shock the past couple of years,
especially in 2024, where there were revals that occurred on top
of, or equalizations that occurred on top of
the budget increases. And so a lot of people that were
expecting maybe a 6% increase are a 20%, 25%
increase due to the value of their homes.
Just remember, we collected no additional money.
Some people paid more, some didn't.
We'll see this year the typical tweaks to certain properties, like we
always have over the past 20-ish years.
But,
so some might see that 5.1%, maybe it's 6% or
something to that effect, but others will see less.
It will be absolutely nothing like the catch-up effect from 2024.
So again, just a couple outlooks. Revenue sharing, it's volatile.
If we don't qualify next year, we lose 810,000.
That just puts us in a bigger budget hole next year, so we need to use caution
there. As you all know, we have tens and tens of millions in deferred
maintenance
at Central Fire, Police, Library, Hamlin, City Hall.
As of right now, we have a tentative plan to put a 2026 bond
question for the police and fire that'll address two of five of these.
That will add debt service payment to next year's budget if it's passed by voters
or, excuse me, to the FY28 budget. And that will impact the tax rate, but we'll
still have three buildings to somehow address.
We do use, even though it's a smaller amount than usual, 250K.
If we don't have any fund balance available for that, then
we'll have to find cuts or increase in taxes to make up for that.
And then although not part of the tax rate, as you all know, the Pearl Street pump
station and plant dewatering project will add significant
debt to water resources budget. There's going to be a 22%
increase in each of the next three years just to cover that debt.
So that's going to be a big hit out of the other pocket of the taxpayer that
pays the sewer bill.
Again, can't stress enough, we're looking for and have applied for congressional
earmarks and are looking at other sources such as TIF, and ultimately
we'll present something for the council's consideration as a way to mitigate those
increases.
Speaking of sewer, the FY27
sewer enterprise budget is up 3.6%.
Again, not property tax dollars, funded primarily by sewer user
fees. The sewer rate as a result will increase by
4.1%. That equates to an $18
annual increase to the average homeowner.
But because at the time of the budget printing, we didn't know what the
impact of the Pearl Street dewatering project debt would be, this does not
yet include that 22% or anything else.
So we will be presenting to you over the course of the budget process,
what we expect the actual increase to be, but we know it's at least
4.1%.
A reminder, South Portland maintains one of the lowest sewer rates in the
region. The typical residential bill
for surrounding communities is roughly 16% to 102% higher than
South Portland. So here, we use the average of
600 cubic feet per month,
and compared it to other Portland Water District communities.
So South Portland,
a home in that case would pay $44, Westbrook 51,
Wyndham 61, Gorham 68, Portland 78, Cumberland 86,
Cape 89. So we are
obviously going to put a dent in that pretty significantly with the Pearl
Street project, but other communities, if you look at the Water
District's plans for upgrades in some of those communities and
some of these communities' own upgrades, they're also
looking at capital projects that are going to
also have significant impacts on some of their rates as well.
Again, these are costs that
reflect 50-year-old pieces of equipment that
were pretty much all installed in the 1970s and now
statewide, countrywide, are coming due for replacement, so we're not alone.
A couple of the highlights of this budget.
It does support expanded water quality monitoring at Willard Beach in
partnership with the DEP and EPA, and there are a number of projects which we'll
talk about in just a second that are included as part of their capital
budgetAnd then finally,
for the special revenue fund, so golf course, street openings,
SPCTV, that's up $153,000,
21.2%. These are all entities which do
not receive tax funding. They're funded by their own fees or
other sources. Primarily, the big increase here is because the
golf course is adding a staff member.
This allows them, through a whole rejiggering of things, to
create an additional park position at no added cost to the tax rate because the
costs are effectively switched to the golf course.
And if people have questions, I'll let Carl explain the convoluted
mechanics of that.
SPCTV, so they're upgrading a current part-time position to full-time.
That is funded, however, by increased billable revenue and decrease in
other expenses that they made in order to be able to accommodate that.
As always, as we've been warning for the past few years, their budget right now is
funded by the Spectrum franchise fee.
So 5% of whatever the bills are in South Portland for
Spectrum TV, we get a check every quarter,
every half, whenever it is, from them.
So the less users, that goes down. That's certainly gone down in
the past 10 years as people have cut the cord.
They had built up a pretty good fund balance, but either by
next fiscal year or maybe the one thereafter, they will have
depleted their fund balance and will either need to
make significant cuts or start putting a portion of their budget on the tax
rate in order to continue the status quo.
So our capital improvement plan, we'll go through this quickly and then wrap up.
This prioritizes short and long-range plans for land acquisition, equipment
replacement, and construction projects over a several year
period. The first year of the program, FY27,
represents the proposed capital budget for that fiscal year.
And that's technically what you're approving this year.
Even though you're approving the whole plan, you're only committing funding to the
first year of it.
So requests, kind of like operating budget, they're made by the departments to me.
I review them with the department director, the finance director, and then we try
to prioritize based on what are the city's objectives, priorities, what does the
comp plan have to say? Are there any special studies and reports?
Do you have an anticipated funding source?
A grant would make your project much more likely to be funded.
We received
77 requests from nine departments totaling
226.3 million. The number is very big this year
because facilities had put in
the cost for all the new city hall, library,
police, and fire. And so that debt service isn't showing up in the budget.
It's just here to show the costs for those things
somewhere.
53 of those 77 items relied either in whole or in
part on 6.2 million of proposed use
of unassigned fund balance. As you heard before, we only had about 3
million available for that.
So we had to cut 19 and partially fund one of these
projects, and that helped reduce the use of fund balance
by 3 million, and that got us to that
3.150 number
there.
So total of in addition to undesignated fund balance, there are reserves and grants
and other sources. We're able to fund 57 projects using all those different
sources. So I want to give you a highlight because I think this is where, unlike
the operating budget, we can be proud of some of the things we're able to fund this
year.
So in city facilities, again, the caveat here is
we've plugged in, we have
165.1 million in facilities needs.
There's no debt service in here. There's no commitment to the council to pay for
them. This is just a placeholder for when the council
decides on whatever next steps, and bonding will
require voter approval. So this is not a debt service assumption.
I can't say that enough.
We do need, unfortunately, to invest some money in existing facilities as we limp
along towards whatever final outcome we have for our buildings.
Our elevator, we've tried to hold off on repairs over the years.
We've done some minor repairs. Our facilities folks have MacGyvered some
parts because they don't make them anymore and haven't for years.
But it's at the point now where in order to maintain ADA compliance, we're going to
have to invest some money into it.
Same thing with the branch library bridge.
If we want to maintain access to the branch library, that is in need of repair.
Central air handling unit is needed at the community center, and we
desperately need
carbon dioxide and... What's NO2 again?
Nitric oxide.
Nitric oxide. I failed chemistry.
Detectors at municipal services.
For planning and infrastructure, we have money in there for Crockett's Corner
improvements, for Broadway Corridor pedestrian improvements,
comp plan implementation for Cash Corner Main Street, Maine Mall Master
Plan, coastal resilient zoning phase two, and a fiscal impact
of development tool. So basically, if a developer comes to us
with a project, we have an off-the-shelf tool that
says, "Okay, here's the impact that project's going to have on city
services and operating budgets and all that." So
I thought that would be helpful with a number of things in the pipeline.
Public safety, we're replacing a fire engine.
We're remounting Ambulance 44, purchasing a new
PD negotiator van and motorcycle, and also street
closure portable barriers.
For parks and public works, we have two new plow trucks, a
compact excavator. We're replacing a skid steer.
We have three replacement mowers for the golf course for different
parks, and also making improvements at
four different trails, the Greenbelt, Hinckley, and Pentulick, totaling
275,000, and then Spring Point Shoreway totaling
60,000.Finally, significant improvements at Willard
Beach. Replacing the playground, we need some repairs to the
snack shack,
a parking lot gate which we may have some private funding for, and
if it aligns with our eventual paid parking plan,
a beach surf rake, and Willard pump station
electrical upgrades.
For sewer and stormwater, this is the WRP budget.
The Pearl Street pump station and dewatering project are the
big ones. There's also the Main Street pump station force main
replacement,
our annual sewer lining program, and chlorine storage tank
replacements.
So again, as I pointed to earlier, fund balance is critical to
fund these CIP items. We wouldn't have been able to fund
most of what you just saw if we didn't have
enough fund balance in our coffers.
So an example of things this year we couldn't fund because, in part, we had set
aside some money for school overages.
There's fencing upgrades in parks.
There's a truck and an ATV that parks needs to be replaced.
The truck's over
nearly 14 years old. There's a GPS field turf painter that
would save a ton of staff time, and we'd be able to focus our efforts elsewhere.
Significant Wainwright infrastructure improvements, a parking study, a
transportation master plan.
The list continues. And next year, there are even
bigger items that we know of that without fund balance, we
may have a hard time funding. So these are cardiac monitors, SCBA
extractor, wireless access point for wireless connectivity in city
buildings,
upgrades to Pier Street and Legere Park playgrounds, a sweeper and a
loader for public works, various sidewalk improvements,
streetlight smart controls, et cetera.
So I just wanted to give you a flavor of some of the reasons why fund balance
is critical.
Don't need to spend much time here.
We've got about $70 million in future CIP through
FY33, mostly in the realm of environmental
protection, and I think...
I'm spacing on this, but I think that's a lot to do with water
resource protection investments that they'll be making over the
next five years. So you'll see most of that there goes to
environmental.
I just want to remind folks at home that all of this information, the budget
information including past audits, we're audited every year, it's
available on our website.
If you go to the budget page on our website, there's the capital
budget, there's a whole document for that, and then there's annual budgets.
You can look back at least 10 or 15 years for older budgets,
as shown there on the screen. The upcoming timeline.
So next week, we have our first budget workshop. The schools will kick things off.
They'll also be presenting, like I did tonight, their share of the
budget. Council will be able to give guidance at that time, and then we'll resume
with the other city departments where you'll determine whether there are
things that you want to take out, add in, reduce, increase,
put those items in the budget parking lot.
And then on the 28th, you'll have your second workshop for all of the other
departments, including the first discussion topic of the
City Council's budget with the committees.
You'll then be able to place things in the parking lot
there. And then on May 12th, you'll have your
final budget workshop, and that's where you'll discuss all of those parking lot
items and consider which ones,
again, you want to add, delete, increase, decrease, whatever.
The week before that, you have the public hearing and council approval of the
budget to send to voters. On June 9th is the school budget
referendum where voters will give the up or down to the school budget.
And on Tuesday, June 16th, there's final budget approval.
So at all these ones that are seen as council meetings, the workshops, the
public hearings, the final budget approval, the public, in addition tonight, gets a
chance to comment there. So members of the public, feel free to attend these
meetings and share your thoughts.
Thanks to department heads who are all here tonight in case there are questions.
I appreciate them for presenting responsible budgets.
And special thanks to our finance director, Ellen Sanborn, Deputy Finance Director
Rhonda Glidden, and our management and special projects associate, Draven Walker.
They put in awesome months of work on getting these documents
to you and to the public. So
with that, I'm happy to turn things back over to you, Mayor and
Council.
But you can stay there, if you wouldn't mind, Scott.
Okay.
I'll stay here.
So thank you. Thank you very, very much.
Thank you to you personally, Scott. This takes a lot to pull it together.
And thank you to all the department heads who have worked with you, and
thank you to all of the staff. I think
it's
quite clear when we see something like this, us residents, it's
a clear reminder of how much goes
on in our city any given day, throughout
the year. And we do really have the privilege of
a nicely high quality of life living in South Portland, and
that is not an accident. It takes a lot to keep a community
afloat, so thank you so much.
Generally, it's council practice to receive
this presentation tonight, but not to do a deep
dive. We have, as Scott pointed out, three more budget
meetings to do that. So I think I'd like to see
us keep to that practice. It doesn't mean councilors might not have
questions, but perhaps we limit our questions to a couple
each at this stage, and then I think we probably
want some of the members of the public to make comment.
So councilors, questions. Councilor West.
My only question on this level is when are we supposed to talk about
the CIP issues?
When the individual department budget comes up, we talk about both their operating
and their CIP requests.
Okay.
Yep.
And then I'd add my thanks.
Okay.
Very good budget. Very responsible budget. Thank you.
Thank you. More questions, councilors?
Councilor Scott, yes?
I had a general question.
You talk about the difference or the valuation increase of about
$20 million. And I think it'd be very helpful for me as a new
councilor and for residents as we think about this budget and going forward,
what the difference is between a valuation increase
versus the revaluation that happened in '26.
Yep.
Or '24, I'm sorry.
And how we as a city, thinking about both our budget and the school
budget, what does it mean to grow the value of
South Portland,
which is separate from a valuation readjustment, et cetera?
So if you could just give
a minute on that.
Yeah.
And then my other question was just in the, I think it's slide 28,
the
municipal expenses and then
non-property tax revenues. The non-property tax revenues
is substantial. I'm sure it's in the massive binder
that you have provided to me, and I've tried to look through every page.
But if you could just give a minute on that.
I think it's mostly sort of sewer, maybe revenues.
What slide was that? What number was that again?
It's number 28.
I just think that's an important thing to highlight, that there is an expense
budget and then a revenue budget, and what that means.
So those-
Sure
... are my two very high level questions.
So I'll start with the valuation one's always a good one to talk about.
So again, the misconception often is if we increase
the value of your home, we're somehow collecting more taxes everywhere.
And reality is, I hate to put it this bluntly,
because I know the assessor got criticized maybe when he said it this way, but
it's a math function. What we need to raise in taxes stays constant
during a revaluation. If we need $100 million in taxes,
when we do a revaluation and if most home
values are going up and business values are going up, the mill
rate's going to go down because we need less of a mill rate now that there's more
value to collect that same 90 million.
And I won't go into the explanation, but it creates winners and losers because
some people's properties go up way more than others.
Some peoples' don't go up very much.
And so,
it really shifts the burden of who's paying what
percent of that overall 100 million.
In the case of revaluations versus new value,
so revaluations, again, in that strict
sense is, it's just you have your home, it's worth
300,000 today, but the assessor comes by and says, "Geez, we
haven't updated the value on this, and all the other
houses on your street within the past three years have sold for
700,000. Yours is comparable, so now your new value is 700,000." So that's
one way. That's not the new value we're talking about here, though.
What we're talking about here is someone went and built a brand new hotel, or they
built a brand new home, and so that's new tax dollars coming
into the community that didn't exist the year before.
And so those are the dollars that help when you have
increases in wages and health insurance.
That's the new revenue that can come in and help to offset that.
And as is the case in most communities this year, the
$270,000 that we got from that new value, it'll end up being a little bit
more, but we were conservative. That's nowhere near enough to
cover all the expenses. Just on the city side, we
had 1.3 million increases in wages due to
union contracts and COLAs. So that 270,000 in new
value,
just that alone, it doesn't even cover that.
So,
the more new value, the more new growth, the more revenue that comes in.
You have to be careful and do an analysis because if you
start building all these new things, there's impact on infrastructure, on roads,
on schools. So
you have to do a careful analysis of when a project comes in, all right, it's going
to generate 100 million in new revenue, but how much is it
going to increase in expenses? So,
and then going back to your question on
other sources of...
If I can get to the right slide. Was it this one?
Yes.
This one here. So
for the school, a big one there is going to be your
state aid from education.
Yes.
So I don't know if that's all of that, but that's probably a pretty big chunk
of that. For the city, our
two largest sources after property taxes are
state revenue sharing
and vehicle excise tax. Those are the two
biggest non-property tax sources of revenues.
That accounts for a significant share of that.
There's other sources of licenses and fees and,
I'm trying to think of some other ones.
I don't know if there's any grant figures in here or not.
But typically speaking, it's property tax, vehicle
excise tax, and then state revenue sharing.
Thank you, Scott. I think the tax point is really important to keep
in mind and keep refreshing about the sort of the difference between
rebalancing versus growth and how we manage that going forward.
So I really appreciate that.
Thank you. And great presentation.
Thanks.
Councilor Walker.
I had 11, but I'll pare it way down.
All right. Well, you will have a chance.
You've had lots of opportunities.
Yes.
I know. Well, I have more for the
other nights, too. But-
100 for the other nights, just 11 for tonight.
So for the county assessment,
I know that right now the final numbers aren't in yet.
Yeah.
If it's higher, will that push our tax rate higher, or would you be
looking to make cuts in other places to get us to still at that
7.3%?
Yeah, typically speaking, theIt's up to the
council, I guess is the right answer.
Typically speaking, whether it's Metro or the county assessment, we try not to
hold the school or municipalities, try to hold us harmless
for that, because if their budget's going up, that doesn't mean we
have less needs or less expenses.
I mean, it's all part of the pot, but yeah, if they went up
significantly,
the two options are either raise taxes,
another cent to cover that increase or cut if it's
$100,000, find $100,000 in savings in the school or
municipal budget.
Okay. And then just two more. In line with that,
I know the school still doesn't have their health insurance premiums.
They're just estimating. Are we in the same boat? Are we estimating?
No, we have our numbers.
Okay.
We're different from there. It's essentially half a year though,
so we have to make some estimates, but it is.
Okay.
We are unfortunately locked in at 10%.
The good news is they have a much larger employee
population, so
that number for them hurts a lot more.
Yeah.
10%'s not great, but 10% for the school would be a lot worse than it is for the
city.
And then the last one on estimating.
So I know that with the war in Iran, this is wreaking havoc with fuel
prices, which will eventually wreak havoc with food prices.
How do you factor that in when you're making these projections,
and has that changed since you started this work?
Yeah.
Or
neared completion of this work in February and early March.
Great question. So that wasn't factored into the budget, just given the timing
of when-
Yeah
... this was due to the council and everything.
So ultimately what it means is if there are road
projects or pieces of equipment or things that are
impacted by that,
like they have been by other things in the past, then,
let's say it's paving, we just get less paving this year.
We do have fixed prices for fuels at our
fuel depot. I can't remember if there's a clause in there saying if the
United States declares war and that impacts it, then we have the right to
escalate it, but I don't know if you know that, Skip, or...
I'll have to look at the contract.
Yeah. Melissa was here. She'd rattle off-
Yeah.
... the page and section that that was on if it's-
You're going to get back to your desk-
Yeah
... with an email.
Yeah. Okay.
Look for a text right now.
Nope.
So
some things are fixed from that, but you're right.
There will be definitely expenses that we have that will be more
because of that.
Thank you.
All right. Can't wait to hear the other eight.
Awesome.
Anyone else? Any questions? Councillor Pride?
Councillor West, you already asked. Okay.
I just, ever the optimist, I have one quick question which is: Is there any
chance that in the governor's supplemental budget just passed, there are
revenue pockets that might come our way?
I know that is actually true for the schools.
For the school, yeah. Not for
us directly as a municipality,
but for the school, there was some good news in that budget.
Okay.
That's good news for us, too.
Yeah. Well, yes, but I meant in addition to. All right.
Thank you so much. Members of the public, I think
you may have some comments about the presentation we've just had.
It's Pedro.
HRC usually-
Pardon?
HRC.
Oh, sorry. Oh my goodness. What a faux pas.
Come on up, please, if we're going to hear the presentation.
Thank you, councilors. Pedro Vasquez speaking in my capacity
as the chair of the Southfield Human Rights Commission.
We recognize what a unique opportunity it is to be able to address
you in this way,
regarding our municipal budget, and are very grateful for that.
So I want to begin by acknowledging the work reflected, in this
proposed budget. As everyone has already said, Scott and his
team do a marvelous job of producing this
document every year.
Municipal budgeting, though, requires difficult decisions, and really
that effort is visible here.
What I'd like to offer tonight is a
human rights perspective on how this budget might be experienced
across our community.
Because as we know, a municipal budget is not just a financial
document, it's one of the clearest expressions of our
values, not what we say, but in what we fund.
And from a human rights perspective, the central question becomes,
not only whether the budget is balanced, but whether it is
experienced as fair.
So who benefits from our investments?
Who is burdened by our decisions? And who may be affected
without being present in the process?
This FY 2027 budget is structurally
sound. It reflects continuity. It reflects
discipline. It reflects a commitment to maintaining core
services.
But it's also a traditional budget in a non-traditional moment.
Right now, as we've been speaking for several weeks now,
parts of our community are experiencing fear, withdrawal,
and uneven access to public systems.
There's reduced participation in civic life.
And so it's within that context of uneven experience and
reduced participation that individual budget decisions
take on additional meaning.
Because even relatively small investments can shape how
systems are experienced.
I just want to offer one quick example that will help illustrate that.
There is a proposed expenditure of approximately
$26,000 for automated license plate
readers,
a technology associated mainly with Flock Safety,
which has been an embattled corporation,
and their
systems have been questioned.
They're controversial to say the leastAnd so
I want to make sure that you understand that this is not an argument against public
safety, it's a request for alignment.
We're respectfully requesting that this expenditure be subject to additional
review and public discussion before adoption.
Specifically, we're looking for clarification of use,
transparency of the data handling,
clear safeguards,
and accountability,
and meaningful community engagement.
Safety is not only enforcement capacity,
it's whether people feel safe engaging with the systems around
them. And we see continued investments in these
systems,
but less invisible investment in participation infrastructure,
community engagement, language access, and targeted support.
We are strengthening systems, but not strengthening access at the
same pace.
And so, again, we appreciate the work that has gone into this proposed
budget,
and recognize what a magnanimous
task it is for it to be produced every year in such a responsible
way. And we hope we continue to ask not only how this budget
performs, but how it is experienced. Thanks.
Thank you very much.
Sorry, I'm taking my last note.
Okay.
All right. I think now is the time that public comment is opened.
Carlton Parsons,
South Portland, 358 Clark's Pond Parkway.
Good evening, City Council, Portland family, and community members.
I am here as a citizen passionate about
budget and the future of South Portland's community.
I heard at the last city council meeting an excitement of members of our
community to present plans to rebuild our water, clean our
community, and donate money to members of our community
who have suffered at the hands of our weak, cowardly, and fiscally
irresponsible federal administration.
But imagine my disappointment when I heard some of the solutions
from our city council. Hesitancy to invest in a clean,
sustainable water system,
a plan to fire some of our best educators in the state and raise
our unemployment rate,
no plans to increase housing supply, spreading the tax
burden, and increasing revenue-- and decreasing revenue
without attention to our budget.
One member said that he claimed to represent all taxpayers by
asserting that every single taxpayer cares more about an
accounting line item than our immigrant neighbors who fundamentally
giving them the dignity they deserve.
So every year we fire public workers, raise our unemployment,
lowering the number of taxpayers, market rates rise, and
housing and rents become more unaffordable
with no long-term solution in tight.
We have seen the long-term effects of other towns who prioritize dollars over
people. Yearly arsenic warnings in public water,
closing healthcare facilities, dying city centers, and residents
living for days without heat or power.
The myth of a balanced budget, of conservatism.
A budget first policy. So here's my suggestion.
In my hand, there is a $300 check made out
to the city,
increasing the equivalent of a cost of a $12
Big Mac meal per my paycheck, a symbol of what
an impact policy of radical revenue generation can do.
We have nearly 30,000 residents in South Portland.
Here's what just one-third of them can do with two back Big Mac meals.
10,000 residents,
$250,000 a month, $3
million a year, $30 million in revenue over a
decade.
Two seconds.
Economic investment on par with major cities in a country
without even tapping a majority of our residents.
So what if the wealthiest in our community gave an additional amount?
500, 1,000, 2,000, a
contribution less than what the poorest people in this community
offer.
So my proposal is the first of its time.
A progressive property tax rate that will benefit working class
homeowners and renters, increasing housing supply-
Time
... reducing the rents and market rates.
Benefits for landlords who reduce and lower rates to
families.
I'm here to ask the City Council to consider a different approach,
that we can increase our budget in new and inventive ways, and that
everyone is one of our taxpayers that just wants
to see our city crumble.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
All right. Do we have anyone else that wants to make comment on
the budget presentation?
Ed Cobb, Romano Road.
I looked at this budget last night.
I'm not sure if something changed from last night to this morning, but it looked
like it went down a little bit per se.
But I did want to ask a question, and the question was this: If we
continue at this rate of spending, which
seems to be about 5% to 6% every year, which is
double the inflation rate nationally,
how long before we get to a $10,000 tax bill for the average
homeownerAnd I kind of tried to run the math, and it looked
like to me, even without
adding any of the capital improvements such as the police
station and the fire department and City Mahoney
redeveloped or reimagined it or whatever it is these days,
that we'd be there in about seven to eight years.
And I just really want to just have everybody just take a deep breath.
Are we ready to have a $10,000 tax bill for the average homeowner?
Because I just don't think we are. And I think if we continue
this continued path of growth, we're going to be there, and
it's not going to take too long.
The other question I had was in
I believe, the executives branch.
It looks like we were losing some COVID money,
but we're continuing to spend that money.
I guess it was free money for a while.
Now that money's gone, but we're not removing that
$100,000 that went away. So I'm just wondering why that isn't the
case. And I guess ultimately,
I think
we need to cut that budget pie at least 2%
somehow. And I'm not saying necessarily that it should affect fire and
safety or public safety, but I think as far as,
for lack of a better way of putting it, the paper-pushing part of the
mechanism needs to go down.
The other thing I would mention too is I get that the healthcare
costs went up, but why is it that the taxpayers are the ones who are
burdened with that increase in the healthcare costs for
employees? Why aren't employees being asked to put in more money?
Just a few questions that I noted. The other last thing I'll mention, too,
and I believe it was mentioned in the budget that we did the whole Metro
Bus
integration with Portland, and it saved $1 million.
I believe it was on last year's budget as well it was mentioned.
But there was no talk about basically what the
State of Maine and their little property tax committee has come up with where-
30 seconds
... they say we need to share services with other towns.
There was no talk about trying to come up with a shared model where we share
assessing duties, per se, with Portland or Cape Elizabeth or anything like that.
And that's it. Thanks so much.
Thank you very much.
All right.
Come on, keep them coming if you have comments. Thanks.
Hi. Lucy Perkins, I live on Walnut Street.
Like many others, I appreciate and recognize that your job as city councilors is
rarely easy, and the task of balancing municipal and school budgets is just
difficult, and hard decisions have already been made to propose the city manager's
budget. So first, thank you for giving this process the care,
thought, and discernment that it deserves to put our tax dollars to the best and
highest use.
Over the next couple of weeks, I hope that as a community, we arrive at a
fair and balanced budget that reflects a commitment to the health and wellbeing of
every person who lives here, that chooses community safety and education, keeping
our schools open with teachers and staff members who care for our students over
surveillance. With that in mind, I'm hoping to simply better understand what
is being proposed in the police department's budget related to Flock Safety.
So I have three areas of curiosity where more information would be helpful.
Can you first clarify exactly what the Flock FY27 budget request will be
for? It looks like seven Flock LPR cameras and software
platform. What has already been purchased?
Second, how is the budget request related or not to the existing contract
that the City of South Portland and Flock have?
Would we be signing any sort of contract amendment?
And third, how does this budget request align with the city's priorities, and why
has it been added? Thank you for hearing out and providing answers to these
questions.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Come on, you guys. Come on.
We want to hear from you.
Hi, I'm Olivia Westfall. I live on Hutchinson Street.
I'm also here to talk about Flock cameras.
And I echo everything that everyone has said, thanking you all for the hard
work that went into the budget. This is
proportionately a small budget item, but I think it's very important.
I understand that the intent of the cameras is for safety, but the more I learn
about Flock as a private entity, the more concerned I am about the
extensive data that these cameras can collect and how the data is being used.
I've connected with the ACLU of Maine, who have been doing research
on ALPR cameras throughout the state and have submitted a FOA
request to many cities in Maine, including South Portland.
Through this conversation with the ACLU and some additional initial
research, it has become clear to me that Flock cameras are being used for
surveillance rather than safety.
Some of the things that have concerned me are the use of Flock cameras by ICE,
even if our local police department may follow the policy that these cameras are
not to be used for immigration status checks, that does not mean that ICE and
other federal agencies will follow this policy.
Flock cameras are being used to track people seeking abortions in other states,
and many other misuses, errors, and abuses of the system, as well
as just being concerned generally about surveillance.
Many cities and municipalities, both in Maine and outside of
Maine, have ended their contracts with Flock due to all these concerns.
There's way too many to list tonight, but I'd be happy to follow up
over email with the many examples that I listed of the concerning
surveillance usage of Flock cameras, as well as examples of cities that have ended
their contracts for these exact reasons.
I have just three questions around the use of Flock in South Portland, and I think
they're similar to the ones that Pedro asked.
But one is, how is our local police department using Flock?
What searches are being run for external entities, and which external
entities are they? What safeguards are in place to ensure
these entities are using the data in line with South Portland's and Maine's
policies?
And that's all. Thank you so much.
Thank you very much.
Two quick things that your comments reminded me of.
Anyone is welcome to email
comments to the city council members at any time,
and we're going to answer questions at the end of public
comment. All right. Any more public comments?
Here comes Alex.
Hi, I'm Alex Redfield on Cooper Street.
After the city manager's presentation, I just did the math and figured out that
my own emails to city staff and online service requests increased by
40% since 2024. And I appreciate the service, and investment,
and planning that goes into that prompt response. Really appreciate the work.
The budget review carries real weight for the future of our city, and thanks to all
of you for digging in. I'd also like to speak to the budget item
around a contract with Flock Safety.
A small dollar value, but outsized in its potential impact to South Portland
residents. Instead of restating the concerns with the company and
police department's relationship with that company, I'd like to call in another
element of the budget line. In South Portland, the ACLU
of Maine submitted a Freedom of Access Act request on November 5th, 2025,
seeking information about the police department's relationship with Flock Safety,
and the safeguards that are or aren't in place for residents' data.
Five months later, that information has not been provided.
The delay is concerning, and my question tonight is to see if staff have any
information on the status of that request, as learning more about the nature of
that contract and the commitments contained therein feels like an essential element
of any good oversight and advance of budget decisions.
In Lewiston, a similar FOAA request revealed that cameras had been installed
without the knowledge of many city officials, discovered only when public works
staff stumbled upon a Flock installer tinkering with a traffic light without
permission, prompting intense public scrutiny and a wholesale
reconsideration of the utilization of these cameras.
To quote, and this will be the first and last time I ever quote the conservative
political firebrand Laurel Libby regarding the process in Lewiston.
"This is a process that is playing out across the state and
across the country to the detriment of citizens and their privacy.
These cameras are installed with grant funding, so they're installed without any
citizen oversight. We should always have a say rather than a secretive process that
skirts citizen approval." As a resident of South
Portland, it is difficult to feel confident in this system without a clear public
understanding of how the partnership operates, how the data is protected, and how
decisions have been made. Without additional information, there are reasons to be
concerned about how residents might be tracked without due process, and about
whether the contract with South Portland Police Department complies with Maine law
on data use and retention. The contract that was revealed through a separate
FOAA request implies that data can be held for 30 days.
Maine state law says individual data should be held for no more than 21
days. And given the context of all this within South Portland budget cycle,
where dollars are tight and tensions are high, additional spending on a tool that
flies in the face of our ongoing public commitment to protect all South
Portland residents-
30 seconds
... feels especially problematic.
As you proceed through the budget process, I hope you're able to find a little bit
of time and capacity to explore the value and concerns surrounding Flock cameras in
South Portland. Thanks.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
Good evening, Council. John Murphy, Willard Street.
I think we need to
look at this budget, and we need to look at it in a different way, and we need to
look at alternatives that haven't been talked about, and do this with an open
mind, because we're looking at... Let's take one item. Let's take the golf course.
We're looking at a $200,000 increase to build a
ramp.
My understanding was that ramp was replaced less than 20 years ago,
that bridge, as they call it. Why do we have to replace it again at a cost of
200 grand? On top of that, you've got, I believe
Scott said, $250,000 worth of mowers that we're going to buy this year
for the golf course. Why do we own a golf course?
Why does this city own a golf course?
We talk about affordable housing. Get rid of the golf course.
Look at all the housing you can put over there.
We're not in the golf business. We shouldn't have a
golf course.
There's a half a million dollars right there that could come out of the budget.
We don't need a bridge. We don't need a bridge to the library, and we don't need
the golf course. And if we need a bridge after 20 years, who
was responsible for putting it in 20 years ago that it's junk now?
I think we gloss over some of these things and, oh, it's nice to have a golf
course. Well, Bath had a golf course. They sold it 20, 25 years ago.
Their city didn't crumble.
Selling that golf course could bring in a tremendous amount of money.
And if we decided not to sell it, and we're so bent on
affordable housing,
there's a tremendous amount of land sitting right there,
two feet away from the highway, from access, from all the access you need at
Broadway, at
295, and all that stuff, Washington Street, Westbrook.
I mean, Westbrook Street, I think it is.
We need to start looking at things differently.
This continued tax increases
for the average person in South Portland are unbearable.
And at what point
is it going to be too much? As somebody said, when does it go to
$10,000 for the average house? And most people aren't even in an
average house, so their increase when...
I love it when they talk about, "Well, our increase is only going to be $200 for
the average house." Well,
that's $200 every year, $400 every year, $600
every year,
and the next thing you know, we're at 10 grand for the average
householder. That's almost $1,000-
30 seconds
... a month in taxes. We've got to start looking at things differently.
And as nice as it is for our community to say, "Yeah,
we're going to stand up and help the people that were concerned about the ICE
agents in town," I don't think it's my place, and I don't think it's the
city's taxpayers' place-
to pay $100,000 or $150,000 to pay for
someone's rent.
And on top of that, what kind of safeguards are in place?
We had six, five people, I guess, in South Brooklyn-
Time, Mr. Dunn
... that were arrested or taken by ICE.
How does that translate into $150,000 or $100,000?
I'm not sure what the number is. It was up to $200,000 at one point.
But how does that translate into a fairness for the taxpayers?
Are you wrapping up?
We need to look at things differently, I think. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else on the topic of the
city manager's presentation of the budget?
Okay, I don't see anyone. Generally, I would say public comment
is closed, but I think what you're saying is that we need
to leave it open because of the other item not being presented.
We've noticed this evening's meeting as the public hearing for both the all
departments presented by the city manager as well as the school, and since that
item is being postponed until the 14th, council will have to make a motion to
postpone to keep public comment open.
You can close public comment, but then you would have to still motion to postpone
and reopen public comment. So it is entirely the council's decision.
All right. It sounds like it might be neater to close public
comment. Plus, I get to bang my little hammer.
So public comment is closed on the topic of the budget
presentation.
Now, we need to motion to postpone-
Do you want to hear the questions this evening and then motion?
Well, I do. Okay. So we'll wait on the motion. Thank you very much.
All right. So we're going to scattershot answer to the questions.
There's a question about
COVID funding and the executive budget.
So back when we received ARPA funds from
the federal government five years back,
one of the small things we used these funds
for were to pay for half of the salary for a new communications
officer and half the salary of a new
purchasing agent or an upgraded position that went from half-time to
full-time. Always very clear that COVID funds would run out.
That in FY26 would be the last year we'd be able to use them, and so
after that, it would go on the tax rate.
So,
this has
been one of those things through the years that we've said, "Hey, this is going to
be something that comes on." So unless the council wants to get rid of the
purchasing agent and get rid of the communications director, which we didn't
think they did, and we don't recommend, that money, as we have been
saying all along,
it now goes on to the tax rate.
In terms of how long until the average tax bill goes to $10,000, a
number of factors would go into that.
How much does spending increase each year?
How much do non-property tax revenues come in each year?
How much new growth is there in a community each year to mitigate any sort of
increases in expenses?
A bunch of different factors
in there. Can the city do things to regionalize to save money?
So that's not really a question
that we've done a sort of analysis on, but it would depend on a
number of factors. In terms of healthcare costs, so
like most municipalities, the city pays a percentage, usually a large
percentage of the cost of health insurance for its employees.
Some of it's dictated by contract for the police, fire, public
works unions, which is where most of our employees are.
For non-union folks, it's dictated by the personnel policy approved by the
council. So,
there are some instances, I think few, where
employees' health insurance is covered at 100%.
In most cases, it's a percentage split, 90/10, 80/20.
So the city, if there's a $1,000 increase in the premium,
the city would absorb $800 increase.
The employee would then pay $200,
for example.
I'll get to the flock questions last because there are several of them.
Skip, can you talk a little bit about the ramp to the library and whether it
was replaced 20 years ago, and
what's going on there?
Yeah. Thanks, Scott. Don Hopkins, facilities director.
So,
before my time in 2013, I believe I've heard, the bridge had
some work done to it. So if anyone's gone by there, you notice they're
very large bridges. They span probably 30 feet, 30 plus feet, go
across this ravine to the second floor of the library.
And, so when they did the work in 2013, they replaced the
concrete. They didn't actually replace any of the structural steel.
Basically, you have metal decking, and then you pour concrete on top of it that
sits on top of the steel. So that was all replaced back in
2013. None of the structural steel was ever done at that time.
So now what's happened is that structural steel has started to fail where it meets
the building, and the hangers on the building that carry that steel have
all rusted up. It actually almost looks like plywood now.
The steel has started to actually
disintegrate and come apart in layers, which is kind of scary.
So,
we're actually thinking that
if we don't do something quickly, which if we don't get that money to do the
capital, then we'd have to redo something on the top of
that, put plywood on top of it, or just to maintain the structural
integrity so we don't have anybody walking through, falling through the concrete
that's there now. And, so the metal decking,
because you have all that rust on the steel itself, that metal decking, even though
it's galvanized, has started to rot away as well.
I have a structural company looking at it and
determining whether it's safe to walk across right now.
But we know that we need to do some work to it to at least get it back up to par
where it would be refinished, and we may have to
replace some of the steel, but we're not real sure of that at this point.
But at least, replace some of the pieces that are there and then repaint
and
sandblast the rest of the steel and paint it all so that it
can take care of,
won't be weather and salt and everything else that deteriorates it.
So that's what the $200,000 is for.
Carl, if you could come up about golf course.
I'll start off saying, if it wasn't clear in my presentation, just to make sure it
is, golf course isn't funded by any tax dollars.
It's funded completely by the revenue it generates.
It is a
revenue surplus generator, so anything that
we buy, like a mower,
is paid for by the golf fees that people pay.
But maybe you could talk a little bit more about that and whether or not that's a
property. I don't know if there's any deed restrictions on that as a golf course or
anything you could talk about.
Yeah. Hi, Carl Coughlin, Parks, Recreation, Waterfront, and Cemetery
Director.
To Scott's point,
the golf course is an enterprise account. It is self-sustaining.
The last two years have been extremely profitable years for the golf course.
I'd say we've generated about a million dollars in revenue over the last
four fiscal years. It's to the point where all of our
capital purchases are being funded through the
golf course's fund balance, so there is no impact whatsoever on the taxpayer.
The golf course itself was purchased using
Land Water Conservation funds back in, I believe, the early
1970s, so I know there are restrictions with that.
Josh, I don't want to put you on the spot, but I know Josh deals quite a bit with
LWCF, and I know that there are restrictions that would
essentially put the city in a bad place with the state's LWCF-
Can I summarize quick, Josh? We'd have to find an equivalent area of
open space if we were to want to develop that and
make that other area. If it's 20 acres, then we'd have to make
20 acres somewhere else open space and not developable. Is that right?
That's right. It's a long process.
We're going through it right now, actually, with one of the acquisitions we did
to...
Anyway, I don't want to go off on a tangent.
We have a little violation that we're addressing that goes back a number of years.
But that particular property, the golf course, yes, the entirety
of it is restricted with a deed restriction, and it'd
be a long process to convert. It's the process called
conversion to
switch it to another property to
take away that deed restriction. It's evaluated through both its
market and monetary value, but also qualitatively, its
recreational value. So you'd have to find another parcel that is
of equal monetary value and equal
or more recreational value. Anyway, it's a long
process to evaluate that.
There's a question about safeguards in place for the money donated to
help with assistance. So that money was not just for
folks that were
detained by ICE, but it was also intended for folks that
were either afraid to show up to work, leave their
homes, or their place of employment was
closed, and so they didn't have
a place to go to work because either the owners had fears
of immigration enforcement or enough employees weren't able to show up.
And so the agreement that we have with Project HOME is they have a
specific vetting system to confirm
that folks were impacted, and the payment goes directly to
the landlord, not to the person making the application.
So there's proof that there's a lease in place, that this
person lives there, they experienced a hardship,
and the check goes to the landlord, and not the
property owner. And it's only reimbursed
to Project HOME. The city only reimburses them up to
$100,000 if they've spent those funds and met those
criteria.
And now, Chief, we have some questions about Flock.
We have questions about the budget amount in FY27.
Where does the follow request from five months ago stand?
What searches have been done? What safeguards are in
place? Can it be accessed by ICE? What's the existing
contract look like, et cetera?
Dan Herrant, Police Chief.
I prepared a document for you, the city manager,
and I believe we shared that with city council as well.
That answered many of these questions. I can read from it.
I was prepared to do a brief presentation during my budget next
week, but I certainly can try to relieve some of the
concerns by our community members here tonight.
The total budget request, I believe, is 21.5,
21,500. That's for seven cameras.
It basically boils down to a licensing agreement for those cameras
after the... They're not really a purchase. They're kind of like a lease.
Automatic license plate
cameras
that we use currently
are provided by this company called Flock.
Flock has, as some people have
alleged, become this controversial
entity. But I have shared with you many, many
success stories that these cameras have
provided to our community, safeguarding our community.
I truly believe that they are keeping our community safe, that they
do not target certain individuals.
They don't surveil individuals.
This is a higher surveillance tool than anything
else that you could ever imagine.
Automatic license plate readers do primarily two things.
When an officer
wants to search for a vehicle, a specific vehicle, or a
license plate of a vehicle, we enter that into the Flock
system, if you will.
That system then will tell us whenever that vehicle
or a vehicle that looks like that vehicle, let's call it a black Mercedes
SUV, if we don't have the license plateWe're
searching for a black Mercedes SUV.
I'm using this example because this was the vehicle that was used in the ATM
robbery
that was solved using the Flock cameras.
We put that in, and any time
any black Mercedes SUV
goes by one of these cameras, whether it's in South Portland or another
entity or state that has those cameras, it will give
us an alert. "Hey, that vehicle just went
by the 295 camera
by Westbrook Street,
by the entrance to 295."
It takes a picture of the license plate and the vehicle, not the operator.
We don't know who the operator is. That
information has to be gathered by the officer, who
then can go into the NCI computer, run the plate, and gets the information
about the registered owner for that vehicle.
There's no pictures of people
driving the vehicles. These license plate readers read
license plates. That's the
technology. Don't ask me how it works.
We then can, yes, track that vehicle's,
where it is. We can send
officers that are out to that area to search for that vehicle.
"Hey, it just went by this camera. Anybody in the area?" "Yeah, I'm by the mall."
"Okay, I'm going to look for it." Hopefully stop the vehicle and we go from there.
So
surveilling
individuals,
keeping information, yes. The information that we gather from
these plate readers are kept for 21 days.
That's main state law. That's
law. That's what we do. That's how we keep it. That's how long we keep it.
I'm trying to remember some of the-
What about searches? Could I just go in and say, "Geez, my ex-girlfriend drives a
white Corvette. I want to track white Corvettes."
Right.
Can I do that?
So, sure.
Could a police officer use this technology for a nefarious purpose?
Sure,
for that purpose. Right? And
I'm sure there have been examples of that, and I think I've read some of those
where officers have been disciplined and fired for that improper use of that, and I
would fire an officer for improper use of this technology.
Is there a log of those searches?
I'm sorry?
Is there a log of those-
There's an audit of all of our searches.
All of these searches are audited. Who did it? When did they do it? From where?
So we have all of that information we can save.
We've been using these cameras for 16 years,
2010?
2010, we've been using automatic license plate readers.
We have policy for it.
If you think about a police officer who's out
there and has their own internal biases, and they're like,
"Well, I want to run that guy. I didn't like what I saw in that car."
Right? "I don't like the look of that car.
It's all beat up." There's some
internal bias. These cameras have none of that.
This is like a force multiplier, it's often defined as,
where you could have a police officer standing on the corner where one
of these cameras is mounted, and they could run, if they possibly
could, every single license plate that goes by, take a picture of it.
Think about the ability of that officer to be able to do that. Can't do it.
Impossible. But these cameras have that ability.
It's like putting a police officer there tracking
stolen vehicles,
missing persons, silver alerts,
abducted children by
sometimes parents,
criminal activity, stolen cars.
I've given you examples of how many of these things that we've been able to
solve just with the use of these cameras.
I want to assure our community that we're not
misusing the cameras. They are
fair. They are equitable. They are safeguarding
all of our community, everyone in our community.
They're an invaluable tool. And the
cost,
frankly, isn't that much money when you really think
about what we're able to do with this technology,
and that's what we're doing. We're taking advantage of
technology.
Can you talk a little bit more about the contract, the amount that is in this
budget? There's one additional Flock device in it
in addition to the how many we have now. Is that right?
Yeah. I fully support this thing. I know people are
going to probably jump out of their seats. I wish I had 10 more cameras.
These cameras are invaluable to us.
We have seven cameras now.
We had six, and we had a, what they call a flex camera.
So it was a portable camera that we could use
to put somewhere if we were working on a, let's say, it's called a drug
investigation. We wanted to put a camera somewhere to see if a certain car was
going to a certain residence
often. We didn't see the real use of that.
We didn't see a benefit to that camera, so we traded it in, turned it in
for a fixed-position camera or another one,
and we actually got money back for that.
Because they
cost less.
There's been some conversation that wasn't brought up
here, like the placement of these cameras.
How did you decide there's cameras
in certain areas of our city that maybe
they shouldn't be in, and they're targeting certain
groups or individuals? The people from Flock
came to us and they saidLet's look
at your city. Let's go around your city.
They drove around, they looked at access points.
You want to have these things as
gateways. Who's coming in and out of our community?
Where are they coming in and out of our community?
295, Westbrook, Crockett's
Corner, that's a big area for us to have people coming in and out of the
city.
Is it near Red Bank? Sure it is. Is it targeting? No.
That's why it's chosen. That's the reason we chose that
location.
Maine Mall Road, in and out, 95. That's why you choose
those locations. We listen to the people from Flock that say,
"From our experience, this is
the best way to get the most
pictures that you can." So that's what goes into
choosing the locations of these cameras.
Chief, in terms of monitoring people, we've heard some people
at No Kings protests have been monitored and followed.
Do we have-
Yeah.
There's no monitoring of...
It just simply doesn't happen. We don't do that.
What we
decide to put in that system to search for and tell us,
"If you see this vehicle cross one of these cameras,"
that's all the information you get.
I mean, is it lawful to do that?
I don't know.
I'm sorry?
Is it
lawful to track people for protesting under Maine law?
I would say that it's
a violation of their constitutional rights.
I don't have any complaints about that.
I haven't heard anybody come to me.
Pedro, we have a really good working relationship.
So no one's come to me and said, "I have a
complaint that my constitutional rights were violated because I believe,
the South Portland Police Department is monitoring
my activities at
rallies or wherever."
I don't have the Maine Human Rights Commission
notifying me of any complaints.
The evidence that I have is that this is a positive
tool that's giving us positive results in
safeguarding our community, and that's it.
Last que-- I didn't hear about the FOA. Any idea why it's taken five months?
I don't know. I'll have to do some research on the FO request.
Someone said that the ACLU
created a FO request for us? For what?
For I-
I don't know. Like for the Flock contract, is that what it was for, just the
contract itself?
And the correspondence too.
Yeah.
The contract? I mean, the contract is-
It's not the contract, it's communications between Flock and the police
department, and a request for the audit logs that was provided from-
Oh. Hey, I'm all about transparency.
I'll sit here and show you the logs.
I'll come up here and we'll do it. We'll put them up on the screen.
You can all see it.
I am all about that. I really want to be transparent about this because
it's such a good tool,
and it's not
harming us. It's safeguarding us.
It really has been magical what we've been able to do,
to find people
from Augusta. "Hey, this
85-year-old gentleman left in a Buick LeSabre, and
we haven't seen him in..." And he hits a Flock camera at the mall, and we go find
him parked at the mall. I mean,
it doesn't get better than that for us.
Thanks, Chief. Last thing I'll say too is in South Portland, it might not be the
same in other communities, but in South Portland, when we get a grant, which we did
to purchase the initial
five or six Flock cameras, those do appear on council agendas and get
approved publicly. So there is awareness.
It's not something that staff applies for and does, and then cameras go up
without anyone's knowledge or having an approval
process that goes through the public.
Okay. So I think we have a couple of
comments that we need to hear, but I also just wanted to ask a
procedural question. Chief, you mentioned that you had planned to do a
presentation. So I believe that's when we're talking about the police
department budget. What is the date for that?
Yeah, I know I have 10 minutes, but I've got another thing that I have to put in
front of you on that night, too, as a request that got deleted from the
budget. So I know I'm going to be pressed for time, but I can do a very
brief
presentation on the Flock cameras as well,
if that would be helpful.
Okay, because I thought I also heard one more question.
I know it's a question that's out there as it relates to these cameras, which is
security for the data that's collected.
Right. So I just want to read a couple of quick things, and I know I'm taking up
time here, people will get away.
So can other law enforcement agencies or organizations
access our Flock cameras or data without our knowledge? No.
Other law enforcement agencies or organizations cannot access our
Flock
cameras or data without our knowledge.
By default, our agency is defaulted to only be
discoverable for sharing at a 50-mile statewide radius,
and no
one outside or organization can see our cameras or data
unless we accept
a sharing request from them. This discoverability only means we
can receive requests from them and then choose how to
respond. So yes, could ICE reach out to me and say,
"Hey, we want to see that camera
footage"? Then it's got to go through me.
That's the safeguard. So we have an automatic default in
our settings that no one can see our data, no
outside agency, unless we allow it.
Okay.At this point, I think our council and our
councilor
would like to be recognized.
Well, I was just going to ask that question, and he answered it.
Oh, okay.
Was who has access to our data?
Different issue. Sure.
Because I think that was the main thing-
Yes
... people wanted to know.
Thank you.
I can just provide maybe a high-level
status update in terms of the FOIA request to maybe
save the chief some time. My understanding, as of last week
in my correspondence with
Janet at the police department, that they were still waiting on the check
from the requester in order to start processing it.
So when there's a FOIA request, there's an estimated cost to review those documents
above and beyond the two hours, and I think as of March
30th, we're still waiting for the payment in order to process the
review of those documents.
Thank you for that update. Very useful.
I'm always available. You know where I work.
Come to me, and I will bring you into my office, and we'll pull it up on my
computer.
Full access, full welcome. Come in, see me, bring a cup of coffee, and
we'll go through it. Anybody who wants to see it.
All right. Let's recognize Councilor Coleman, but then I think it's going to be
time to bring this to a close.
My question is, does Flock have access to the data
it's collecting? Because that was like a-
Yes, it is secured by Flock. Yes.
But do they have access?
Yeah, but they don't-
So we're trusting them is what you're saying.
Well, let's see.
Is there a backdoor or can Flock-
Yeah
... quietly change the logs?
No, there is no backdoor access for any agency.
Audit logs are designed to be complete, transparent,
and
reviewable. Entries are written automatically,
retained for oversight, and cannot be quietly edited or
overwritten. Changes to sharing or settings
appear as separate events, not hidden modifications.
What do our Flock edit logs capture, and are searches justified?
Our audit tools capture who searched when, what
they searched,
which can review, and, if needed, share with appropriate
oversight bodies. Searches
are tied to the standardized NIBRS-based offense type, so
there is a clear
public safety justification documented for every search.
Can't just, "Hey, I want to search
because I want to know who's parked at my girlfriend's house." Right?
You've got to put in there the reason for your search.
Why you're looking for this car.
Okay.
Thank you.
We look forward to
reviewing the police department budget when it is time to do that and
hearing all kinds of good information. Thank you.
At this time, with questions answered, I
think that we have to postpone the school
discussion.
So I need a motion to postpone.
I need a motion to postpone what
is called the superintendent of schools
proposal, but I don't think it's supposed to be called that.
So not sure what to do about that except to amend the
postponement, because I believe when it comes to us after the school
board has passed it, it's called the school board's budget.
Is that just nothing anyone cares about?
That is simply how it's titled on the agenda.
The notice is for the public hearing of the budget.
Okay.
That's what we are postponing.
Let's call it that then. All right.
Can we have a motion to postpone that to April
14?
Yes. I move to postpone the public hearing for the school portion of the
budget to April 14th.
Well done. Thank you. Do we have a second?
Second by Councilor Walker. All in favor?
All right. That is finished. I think we are moving to ordinance
number 18. Thank you.
Ordinance number 18-2526 amending Chapter 14, licensing
regarding marijuana establishments. This is the second reading.
First reading passed on March 19th, 2026.
Passage will require a majority vote, and this will be a roll call vote.
Okay.
Suddenly, I've forgotten everything.
We don't do questions, Chad.
Hmm?
I'm tired.
Yeah, we still need presentation questions and-
Yes.
So, council-
Okay. What do we have anymore?
We have three ordinance updates related
to marijuana establishments that you heard about in detail last time.
So these are chapter
14, and, excuse me, 214 and 27.
Our planning director is here if you have any further questions, but
otherwise, no additional presentation.
And
the council approved the first read and now needs a majority vote for
the first ordinance for this one, which you're discussing, chapter
14. The next one will be five votes are needed for
chapter 27.
Councilors, any questions? Thank you, Scott.
No questions?
All right. Public comment on this item?
I don't see public comment. It's closed on this item.
What is the wish of the council?
Move for passage.
Thank you. Do we have a second? Thank you, Councilor Walker.
Councilor Coleman, did you want to say anything?
Nope.
Councilor Walker?
I think, and it makes sense-
Yes
... what they're looking to do, and I support it.
All right. All in favor?
This is a roll call.
Roll call. Oh, sorry. I'm sorry.
I can't read.
That's okay. And just to clarify, this is the motion to
pass the second reading of this ordinance.
We will start with Councilor Pride.
This is 18.2526?
Yes.
Yeah.
Licensing.
Yes.
Councilor West.
Councilor Coleman.
Yes.
Councilor Walker.
Councilor Scott.
Yes.
And Mayor Tipton.
That is a unanimous vote of all the councilors here.
Let's move to Ordinance 19. Thank you.
Same thing as I mentioned earlier.
This is the one that needs five affirmative votes because it is related to zoning,
but
similar topic
as to the ordinance amendment you just passed for Chapter 14.
Thank you. Do you have questions, councilors?
Can I begin onto the record?
Yes. Oh, sorry. I thought you had already had.
No. Ordinance number 19.2526, amending Chapter 27,
Zoning Regarding Marijuana Performance Standards of Section
27-1902, second reading. First reading passed on March
19th. As Scott has mentioned, this will require five affirmative votes and
shall be a roll call vote.
Okay. Now, do councilors have any questions?
None.
Sorry.
Yeah.
Councilor Scott.
I just wanted to confirm, and I think it's helpful as we consider this,
and I'll ask this as a question, but to confirm that this does not change
the number of facilities allowed, the distance of those facilities
allowed to other uses.
It really is simply allowing a change of use within
a facility from, say, recreational to medical or vice versa.
So I just think it's helpful to confirm that as I consider this, as the
public hears us discussing this, and I would love to make sure that
I'm reading this correctly.
Yes. So Milan Ovida, the planning director.
What this would allow is the square feet that
currently exists in what we call the storefronts.
That's medical adult use or dispensary-type businesses.
The square footage that we currently have allowed would remain the same because
they are all non-conforming uses.
They don't comply with setbacks and other things, which means they cannot expand,
but they can continue operating as they are.
What this ordinance will allow them to do is take that square footage and do
combinations of product lines,
product lines that are certified as adult use versus medical versus a dispensary
class. And they could take that square footage, if it's 500 square feet, and do
100 square feet of adult use-oriented business, medical use-oriented
business, and so on. This is
not the appropriate amount of square footage because it's too small, but you get
the point.
Thank you. It's very helpful.
Okay. Any other questions? No. Any public
comment on this item?
I'm a tax accountant, so I'm not very
good with speeches, but my name is Peter Morris.
I'm a part owner of Rosebud LLC.
I was unable to attend the last meeting.
I'm here tonight to provide a brief
background.
When we brought this to the city staff, our goals were to help the
existing stores adapt to the new state laws while
respecting the intent of the city council, who in
2021 decided to not allow any
new stores.
The main focus was to create a win-win for the
town and the businesses that have had zero
complaints since opening. Thank you for your time in
considering this matter, and we look forward to a
continued mutually beneficial relationship.
Thank you very much.
My name is Tom Morris, and I'm here representing Rosebud LLC.
Two weeks ago, at first reading, my testimony centered around my
relationship and history with South Portland over the last nine years.
Tonight, I would like to highlight some of the comments from your colleagues on the
planning board when this item was in front of them.
So from Board Member Taylor, "I was here in 2017, and I remember how much
time that we spent talking through this.
South Portland was the untested leader, and a lot of other towns saw that and
reached out for advice. Over the past years, we've done pretty well.
A lot of work was done in 2017. I feel that these businesses have
contributed in a good way to the community and took a lot of the empty retail space
in town."
From Chair Kelly, "I agree with what's been said.
I was on the board when we implemented the 2021 changes to the ordinance.
The thought was to stop the development of new stores and that there would be some
attrition over time. At the time, I wasn't thinking of forcing out
businesses that had established themselves with our existing ordinances at the
time. It strikes me that we ought to support the businesses that relied
upon the ordinance that were adopted in 2018 and give them every chance to
succeed. It's a competitive market, and some will thrive, and some will not.
That attrition still might come naturally, and seems to me that these changes will
bring us into conformity with the state."
And finally, Mr. McDonald,
"I don't see any reason that we should punish the people that did it right the
first time just because the regulations have changed over time.
I don't think the laws of natural selection have changed.
We shouldn't be the ones that artificially change that.
So I'm all for this approval. Let the ones that are evolving evolve.
This doesn't add any street frontage, doesn't add any square footage.
It just amends to the current situation that they're now facing.
I think you got it right the first time, and I think voting for this honors that."
Now, I'd like to finish this by reiterating that these changes are simply
bringing South Portland's marijuana code in line with the state law changes that
have occurred since 2021
This will not add any new stores, and the existing stores are not allowed to expand
their facilities or impact in any way.
Myself, my family, my staff, and the patients we've worked with here in South
Portland respectfully ask for your support on this item.
Thank you for your time tonight, and I look forward to many more years as a part of
this great community. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Councilors, do we have a motion on this second read?
Moved. Move for passage.
Councilor Coleman moves for passage. A second?
Councilor Walker. Thank you. And with glasses on,
I managed to see it's a roll call vote.
We will start with-
I don't think either one... Yes?
I have a question.
Oh, I'm sorry.
It's council common at this point, I thought.
Yes. You're absolutely right. Councilor Coleman, did you want to make any kind
of a comment?
No, except that having both medical and
recreational in one spot,
I
wholly approve of this.
Okay. Councilor Walker, did you?
I think the comments that you highlighted from the planning board-
Yeah
... say it perfectly, and I support this.
Okay. Councilor Pride. My apologies.
Question from the lawn.
I was just sort of thinking back to the map we saw last time of the sort of
clusters and then I think Rosebud is kind of out there in the
middle. And I guess my question is this: Is
Rosebud within a buffer that prevents it from...
If
Rosebud shut down and someone else wanted to open a store, a marijuana
facility there,
would someone be able to under the buffering ordinance?
If Rosebud shut down and they let their license lapse, and the new provision you've
allowed for the 90-day grace on the license-
Mm-hmm
... for instance, was not used, then that location would no longer be
permitted as a marijuana business.
And a new one could not be established
then or two years later, whatever, because the LB zone that it's in
doesn't have that as a permission.
This is the thing where we're keeping non-conforming status-
Yeah
... and only allowing internal conversions and recombinations, and that's what
prevents an additional store from being established.
Okay. All right. Thank you.
There are zones, I can't remember the exact number, but it's small, maybe four to
six
zones that do still allow it in the permissions tables.
Those are closer to our downtown area-
Mm-hmm
... where we have a mix of uses, and LB's just not one of them.
All right. Thank you very much for the help.
So I'll just
reiterate my comment from last time.
I do remember the conversation when we created that ordinance in the first
place, that there was meant to be attrition.
I don't necessarily think-- I
understand the comments from the planning board, but
a store that's survived this long as medical marijuana,
then continue to survive as medical marijuana.
But if you can't, then unfortunately, you have to close, and our buffering
ordinance was not, in my opinion, meant just to stop
further stores from being opened.
It was also meant to lower the number of stores we already have because there were
a number of public comments during that time, and I agreed
with them, that we just have too many stores.
So that's my position. I understand it's not shared with the rest of the council,
but we can agree to disagree.
Okay. Good. That will be-
That's all I ask
... our motto from here on in.
Yeah.
Anyone else? I'm sorry, only the councilors can talk right now. Thank you.
Anyone else?
Well, I will just say that I appreciate that Councilor
Pride is bringing forward what he
recognized as
a public
concern from a couple of years ago.
And I think that is credible for you to bring forward, so
thank you.
All right. Now, I think we have a roll call vote.
Councilor Scott?
Approved.
Councilor Walker?
Yes.
Councilor Coleman?
Councilor West?
Yes, and add that I really appreciate that we can treat each
other with respect and courtesy when we disagree.
Mm-hmm.
Councilor Pride?
No.
And Mayor Tipton.
Yes.
So that is a vote for passage of this second
read.
Thank you. Councilors, with your forgiveness, I need to
have us recess for five minutes. Five minutes only.
It's 8:59 right now.
Oh, I
don't
want
to
stand up.
The council is once again in session.
Thank you very much. We're going to begin our facilities
workshop.
Generally, the manager gives us a little preamble,
and the manager is certainly welcome to do that.
I think the reason that we have this workshop on our agenda is that
council members have asked for the
discussion of the facilities and
really the discussion of the property, Mahoney
School,
to be repeatedly on our agenda
so that we can talk about it.
So,
did you want to preface anything, Scott?
Yeah. No updates specifically for tonight other
than
I think I've already actually provided the
council with how the Mahoney City Center committee
meeting went. We did have a funding subcommittee meeting last week, I
guess maybe is a good update. And so they started talking about what a
public-private partnership might look like, the different options and
scenarios, and are going to start
potential issue,
like an RFI, not an RFP, like for, "Hey, we're going to partner with someone," but
just to have something out there where different developers who might be interested
in coming in and just helping to educate the committee on what these things might
look like. That way, everyone has an equal opportunity to come in and share their
thoughts. So that's kind of where they're at in the next steps.
Okay. Well, that is good to hear. Thank you.
Councilors, is there anyone who would like to begin
with any questions for Scott? Any
realizations recently about the project?
Anything that you would like to hear from staff the next time we
discuss this?
The field is yours.
Councilor West.
Yeah. I do have some thoughts and observations, and I appreciate the opportunity to
talk with the council, and I think it also
overlaps suggested changes to the order about the
ad hoc committee.
I did go to the Finance
Committee meeting last weekAs a member of the public,
and I also later that afternoon took another tour of
Mahoney.
One thing I think
to me is important is what's
happened is we've had the recommendation of the committee, which the
committee reinforced
after we asked them to look at it again, that they liked
this option one,
and that is their best use of the
mission that we originally envisioned and we gave to them.
And I don't think we ever got a dollar amount of
what option one without the police station
would be. And it seems to me from the point of view of carrying out
the responsibility that we initially gave to the committee and the
committee coming back to us,
just to keep the procedure moving in a clear way, I would like
to have
presented to the council
the committee's recommendation about the best way to
carry out the vision
with which they were initially entrusted
is estimated to cost or would require a bond
measure of X dollars,
so that that is
public and everybody knows it. So that's the first thing
I'd like to
see if there's any consensus about in this workshop.
I would like to-
Councilor.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
I would
second that. I think that having
a rough idea of dollars would be good.
I know we kind of all pushed a little bit on it when we were at the Mahoney
committee meeting last time, but just having an idea of the option that
we kind of landed on without the police station would be good
to have for council as a working number.
Anybody? Yeah, Councilor Scott.
Can I ask, was that not included in one of
the sort of A0 through C1
cost estimations that SMRT put together and provided to
us? Because that did not include the police station.
One did not include the library. I thought there was sort
of multiple options, and the committee had sort of
said...
Well, I guess that's my question. I thought we had that cost.
It was never presented in a clear way
with backing out the police station and the police
station site costs and everything.
Just because
we were getting ourselves so confused with all the different options, I think we
just need to hear clear and concisely
what the dollars are with the preferred option by our
committee, carrying out the responsibility that we initially gave them.
Yeah, I think to Councilor West's point, the information
is in there, but it wasn't presented in as clear like a, "Hey, what does this look
like exactly without the police station?" There was a range that was given,
but we talked a lot about options A1, C1, B2, all
these other things, and so clearly it wasn't as clear
as it could've been.
Okay.
So they can definitely come in and talk more about
that at a future meeting.
Or the staff can. The staff can present it if you want.
Yeah.
It's just that we need to be able to say to the public,
our initial vision
with our committee,
if we were going to go forward with it, we would, in all
likelihood, have to ask the voters for a bond measure of
so many dollars.
Yeah.
And there's a lot of confusion out there right now-
Yeah
... because people are still running with the 194 million.
Right.
And, I think that's the next step.
Okay. So that is a clear request
of council.
Do we have other thoughts, comments about Mahoney tonight?
Well, I do. Mine are mostly directed to the committee and where
I'd like to see the committee going from now and the
process.
I
was pretty discouraged. I was very discouraged after
the finance committee meeting,
and I kind of tried to regroup and think through what we're
doing here and what I think the council wanted to do
at its last meeting.
And our mayor takes really good notes.
Mayor, I admire you that you take those notes.
Because she-
No.
She
shared them with me, and I think-
I haven't seen these. This is the first
... that the-
... couple of these notes
... I think when we're talking about a public-private partnership,
we are talking about something that includes
more than just the finance. Because
we're talking in all likelihood about what tax credits might be
available, and the biggest tax credits are probably historic tax
credits.
And I think I'd like to suggest an alternative
approach. Rather than have the finance committee do it,
I think at least the initial investigation of
this public-private partnership would be most effective if the chair of
the committee, who's Mike Halsey, who has a lot of experience with
projects and understands both the financing side
but also the planning and development side, could,
in a way that's appropriate or that he believes is appropriate, choose a couple
people on the committee that have expertise and do some
preliminary inquiries and fact gathering.
And then whatever he comes up with in the way of
finance, he can share with the finance committee, and they can use
that. And then he and hisHis group, because I know he
has mentioned to me has at least two people on the committee who have
experience with historic buildings for colleges,
that however he wants to proceed, then
can present to the bigger committee,
and they can
make recommendations to us about an RFP or however they'd like us to
go for the future analysis of a public-private
partnership.
I think that would be a more appropriate approach, and use the
expertise that we have available more efficiently
than
what I saw happening last week. So that would be my second
suggestion for council discussion.
Okay, thank you. Any responses?
Yes, Councilor Walker?
I think that's a great idea. I think that it's a more efficient
kind of fact-finding than going for an
RFI.
Yeah.
Right off the bat, I think it's going to be probably more cost-effective,
and would not bog down staff resources with
preparing and then vetting the RFIs.
I think the RFIs could come in once we have that kind of preliminary
fact-finding done. And so I would support that idea of
Mike's subcommittee
gathering data and then presenting it to the finance subcommittee, and then the
finance subcommittee making their recommendation to the larger Mahoney committee
from there. Is that what you're suggesting?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. And I feel like all of that can work probably
pretty quickly
in between Mahoney meetings.
Thank you.
Other councilors? Councilor Price.
Yeah, I think what Councilor Walker just said is kind of what I
was envisioning when we suggested it in the first place, was not
necessarily to have finance look at that in sort of a
strictly numbers sense, but have a vision for how
a private entity could use the space, could
be involved in
the planning and
the execution of the project.
Thank you.
And Councilor Scott?
I just want to voice my
support for that. I think it is
a little more of a sort of creative development, kind of
transactional almost activity than a finance
committee or a financing sort of
task.
So I'm in support of that. I think I've been trying to sort of think
about, and there were lots of versions of this order,
think about beyond that, how we sort of
direct or change this order for the Mahoney
committee itself. And part of me feels like I'm not
there yet on having a clear next step, because I think we have
identified a next step of trying to be creative with a
public-private partnership or P3,
to evaluate that a little bit and then think about what sort of activities
across the broader Mahoney committee make sense.
So I'm
sort of struggling with what exactly in the language needs to
be amended or changed, and what we have clarity on to
make those clear directions.
Maybe after this discussion I will feel better about that.
But I feel like there's a little bit of sort of churning, and maybe it's this
committee that would do a little bit of work and sort of get us to that
point where we say, "Okay, where do we send the broader
committee next?" They've done so much work.
They've created this sort of vision, and I think we need to kind of...
And maybe it's the committee, but I think we need to kind of
massage the aspirations a little bit and see with
other partners
what we can kind of move around and compromise on the table to make
this work and to save the building, which I think is one of the priorities, and to
provide some city facilities.
If those two things align, they do, and if not,
then we need to figure out that path.
Thank you.
Yeah.
That's a very interesting idea, because I was going to throw out a couple of other
things, but I think they're premature given where we are.
So maybe we could put off amending
the order and simply tell the police chief
and the fire chief they don't have to come to the Mahoney committee anymore,
because when you try to read through it, that's one of those
things. And then
let
the things we've just talked about percolate a little bit, because
I
can share the stuff that was on my mind if you want.
Okay.
But maybe, Madam Mayor, you wanted to say something.
Okay. I was just going to say two things.
One, it sounds like we're going to be getting to the work of
actually working on the charter
rewording soon, so I'm glad we moved the order
and that we're warming up.
The other thing is an admission of guilt.
One reason I can take good notes is the guilt is that I'm
afraid I miss things in a meeting, and so I go back and watch some
of them again. Yes, I am a council
nerd.But when I look at notes
from the last time we really gave official
guidance,
it seems like we're still saying the same thing.
The guidance was that we wanted to explore public
partnerships, and we said we need to learn more potentially
from developers and financing experts.
So it seems like we're just recommitting to that
notion. The only other thing I wanted to say that I've been thinking about
recently,
especially because I went back and read some of the
stuff that is on Greater Portland Landmarks website about
Mahoney, is the historic aspect of this building.
And I started to worry a little tiny bit,
did we underplay in giving direction to
the Mahoney committee, the importance of the historic
aspect of this building?
And also, that is getting my attention
because of the potential for historic tax credits.
So I just wondered if anyone
thought that we need to say, "No, really, that's
important." When we look at design, when we look at these ideas,
not just the outside of what it looks like, but how
historical architecture is functioning inside of it.
We know we need to adapt it to modern energy standards,
for example, but
I think I would like our committee to know to be
attentive to its historic aspects so that we don't
endanger getting historic tax credits.
So
I was going to suggest that we include a
member of the historic preservation committee-
Oh.
... on the Mahoney committee, for example.
But I'm wondering if maybe it's
premature. If we're going to let the chair of the committee do some
preliminary work and figure out what might be involved
in
historic tax credits, maybe we should defer really
revising the
order. Or do you want to keep going tonight and try to do it?
Well, I think before we decide to revise the order, we need to decide that we've
had our workshop and that we're ending it. Have we?
No.
I don't think we have.
No?
Yeah, because I have more-
All right
... to say, too.
Okay. Well-
But I can bring it... But go ahead.
Council-
This is our big chance to talk.
Yes, council-
So the historic preservation committee, and Scott correct me if I'm wrong, but the
historic preservation committee, much like the HRC, they don't have an actual
seat on the
M3C.
But they have expanded public comment
rights, and then they can also make requests of us to present to them.
Yeah, and the HRC did present to us.
Yeah.
And they said, "Here's what you should do." And they said-
Not HRC,
the HP-
The HPC, sorry.
Yeah.
Really keeping the exterior of the building was critical, and then
internally trying to keep the windows and if there's specific
architectural features to keep those.
So I don't know if that would be enough to
qualify for the historic tax credits.
I think that's worth a longer conversation about, do we want city
offices just shoved into an old science lab?
Is that going to be worth...
I think that's a good process to go through and a good conversation to have.
But
anyway.
And I think it would be important, councils, would you allow the caveat, if we are
going to put a committee that's going to look into this, that no one should be on
the committee that may have a future interest in developing any sort
of
part of the properties,
in terms of whether it's the school itself or properties on the
field.
Wouldn't that make sense if there was entities that might be
interested in that and having a role on the committee?
We wouldn't want there to be some sort of hand on the scale.
Can I ask for clarification on that?
Yeah.
So are you saying, and I just want to make sure I understand, so are you saying
either... So I'm just going to pick on Mike because...
So Mike shouldn't be on the committee because he's South Portland Housing?
If he has an interest in ever developing Mahoney or a parcel of it,
that would seem, to me, a conflict of interest.
Okay.
I'm not suggesting he does, but someone like that, if we're looking for an
objective answer-
Correct
...
if someone's going to be on that subcommittee, say, "Hey, yeah, I have no interest.
I'm not going to
be part of that." I think that's a pretty simple ask.
I have a second part of clarification.
And then are you also saying that anybody that presents to that
subcommittee is also then exempt?
Not present, but again, as we discussed in the meeting, it is
pretty hard when you've got a group that comes and presents to you and you really
like what someone has to say, and we haven't given everyone a fair shake.
We've picked who so and so knows, and they come in.
I have concerns with that. The finance director had concerns, the assistant city
manager had concerns. If council doesn't have concerns with that, that's fine, but
that was something that we had thought would've been a little bit of a concern
if it was us handpicking who came in, and would that give
them a leg up when it came time for proposals.
Got you.
Hm.
So just to go back to the-
Yeah.
... sorry, the historic preservation thing.
So I would not recommend putting a historic
preservation committee member on the Mahoney committee itself.
I would suggest just having them either
come for their additional public comment, or
reach out to them and see if they have questions for us-
Yeah
... as we're moving through this. Just because I feel like adding another person,
another role to the committee at this point, could really slow things down.
Okay. Can I just say one thing?
There are enough developers in Maine who take the historic tax
credit
To give good information about how it's done and what you need to do.
That's what my opinion is on this. It is only an opinion,
but I think it's one that has a little bit of
truth behind it. Yes.
Okay. Then my next point was,
our stretch code, I am unclear about whether our stretch code is
adding cost to the project, and whether we
should look at whether the stretch code shouldn't apply to
historic buildings.
What is the stretch code? I can't remember.
Energy and sustainability.
Oh, thank you.
I've been hearing it mentioned. I don't know.
Because I'm not on the committee, I don't have enough background, but people have
said to me that the stretch code was adding extra costs.
Maybe that could be a question for
the next time that we hear from SMRT or the-
Yeah
... our project team. Okay.
Right. Would be...
Yeah, presumably that would. You're right.
Because it's going beyond what's required. It's the stretch.
It's going to-
Right
... the next version.
So they could
let us know if they are complying with the stretch
code, and then
we could have a discussion or somebody could-
What's that difference
... or the committee could, I guess the committee would start, would it be
appropriate to not apply the stretch code to historic buildings, which
would probably be some kind of an ordinance amendment, but it seems to me
to be something that we should think about.
Councilor Scott, did I see your hand up?
No, I think that's a great idea. I was just going to comment
that I think a lot of this has been sort of churned through at the committee
and presented. I think it does make sense to sort of present it again as we try to
solidify where we want to kind of direct or
redirect the committee.
But yes, it is essentially there's sort of building codes and energy
efficiency, and then we have gone above and beyond
that to have
more, better, greener
codes and whatnot. And I think there are a lot of aspects
in historic preservation,
that have
maybe conflicts or don't mesh as well with some
of the standards for new buildings, and I think it is helpful to sort of
explore that and be very surgical and strategic
in the way that that is applied.
And that preserving
historic windows has a value and
a reduction in landfill
debris,
that should be evaluated similarly to more energy
efficient new windows that you would've put into a new building.
So I think all of that work can be discussed with
SMRT and with the committee and
yes, restating the historic
preservation goals here,
I think for both the exterior and the interior,
would be a helpful kind of presentation and redirection.
Because what's been explained to me, I can't say it as
articulately, but is that if we invest in the
geothermal
climate control system,
that's an environmentally responsible,
relatively low cost. Somehow
it helps
cover the cost that you don't totally upgrade the building in the long
run. I don't know. Sorry, I can't say it very well.
Well, I'll look it up and get for another time or let the committee do it or
whatever, because those people are all more expert.
So
and then kind of talking where I see just the big picture, where I see us going
from now. We've done
the gold standard thing of asking, having a vision,
having a committee. The committee kind of works with the professionals.
They come in with a vision and we're going to put a dollar to it,
and that's that. Then
we're going to say, it seems to me,
what are other ways that we can make this a reality for our
community? I got discouraged at the committee meeting, but I got
encouraged when I walked through Mahoney because it is a spectacular building,
a truly spectacular building. And we should do everything we
can to save that building for public use for our community in the
future. And so
it seems to me we got to look at two sides of it.
One side of it is whatever financial things there
are out there, tax credits or whatever ways we can work on it.
And the other way is, what are the things that we can do that will be
less expensive to reduce the overall cost of the
project? And in doing that, I
hope that we can identify a project that will meet the
needs of our community for the long-term future.
And so I do think that there's another provision of
the
resolution that needs to be
changed for this next part. And it's the part,
it's in
the second paragraph when it gives the committee its different powers and
everything. So this is a workshop, but I'm talking about the committee.
And it gives the committee the powers to advise on design elements of the
project. But then the last two paragraphs
give all the authority about the square footage and the stats
to the city staff for the interior space.
And I think with this new phase we have got to have the
flexibility to let our design professionals and
whoever might come along that
understands the
tax credits and the other ways ofdoing this
to see if the project could be redesigned in a way
that would meet the city needs.
And so we're sort of starting from the bottom and working up.
Here's the historic building,
here's what we can do with it,
here are some ways we can make it work at
less of a cost by taking advantage of the historic criteria and
characteristics. And so if we do this, will it meet the city
needs? And I think that
having this language in here right now is too limiting because we
have to take a new look at how the spaces can
function and let our design professionals start, and
then work with the city staff and see, does it work for you?
And maybe it doesn't. Like Scott was saying, if it ends up that the way
it has to work is that there's a lab, and that lab just doesn't
work,
then
we
know where we are. But I think the responsible thing to do is to take
that approach as a sort of bookend to the
first approach we took and see if we can meet the needs of the community in that
way,
because it's likely to be substantially less expensive.
So
I guess those are the things I wanted to say, and some of them relate to the
order, and some of them don't.
Okay.
May I ask a question?
What exactly is a request for information?
That is exactly what it is. It is any way you want to draft it
to request information to be submitted by submitters.
Because I heard Counselor Walker say, "Well, maybe we're not
ready for that yet." And I also heard the city manager say,
in a diplomatic way, that maybe it doesn't do for a
city to go, "Oh, well, somebody's uncle once built this, and somebody
else I worked with did this, and they're the ones who should come and talk to us."
And I'm exaggerating just to make the point.
And again, maybe
you should say this more. Is it that, Scott, a request for
information for you is a fairer
way of a municipality saying, "We're ready to hear from
a variety of
experts"?
Right. Those that are interested, we put it out there, and if they want to come in
and educate the committee, whatever version it
is, on, "Hey, here's how historic tax credits work.
Here's how private-public partnership works that we've
been on." It's not giving a proposal necessarily, it's just providing
education, essentially. And Josh, you crafted a draft RFI.
Is there anything you wanted to add to that?
Josh Urani, assistant city manager. So yeah, I've circulated the draft.
Really, the intent is for it to be a very low barrier,
relatively easy response for anybody who wants to respond,
so that it's equitable.
I even included some language to say
we wouldn't be evaluating responses necessarily for completeness, but
it would at least give us an indication who has interest in talking to us, and we
could set up a time to have a discussion, just
sit down with the group and have a discussion.
I think by opening up to more than one or two,
we might be able to hear a few different perspectives.
And although certainly the tax credit
program is pretty black and white, is how it works,
we may hear different perspectives on how different developers would want to
approach
potential public-private partnership, even beyond the
tax credit scheme.
And what they see as some of the values of the
building and how it could be reused.
And so really, it's just intended to educate us and
prompt just some brainstorming and ideas.
If we limit it to one or two, we'll probably get some good information,
but everybody's going to come in with their own angle.
And so we might hear just one angle,
and we need to hear more than that, in my opinion.
And just one other thing. It sounds like
there's been some discussion of this at staff level.
Hearing that you actually drafted a
RFI confirms that. What were you thinking in terms of
timing?
This was discussed at the committee.
Right. Well, I wasn't there. Sorry.
Yeah.
So how quickly could this happen?
How long would it be out there? That kind of thing.
To be determined. I've circulated the draft to the group, and I'm hoping that we'll
get suggestions and comments on editing it, and
I put in there approximately a four-week turnaround.
Maybe it doesn't need to be as long.
Again, it was really intended to be a very low barrier.
Wouldn't have to invest hours and hours and thousands of
dollars. It's not like an RFP, for example.
It's just, here are a list of our
questions.
Write up a written response to us in whatever time it takes
you, and even if it's not 100% complete, at least we'll have your
information, and we can invite you in to have a conversation.
And there are a bunch of entities that do this
type of work.
But the conversation we had at the committee level was that it's probably not going
to be 20 responses. Maybe it's a half a
dozen. It's hard to estimate, but hopefully, it's something that's
manageable, where we could invite everybody in to
have a discussion with them.
And one more question. I have heard
that on our current Mahoney committee, because of the nature of the
people who serve on it, there are at least a few people there who would
recommend that the committee hear from, and the froms are
developers they have worked with in the past.
Can we do both of those things? Can we say to them,
"Yeah, bring a couple of the people that you know.
Have them talk to the committee,"
Finance Committee, "or committees," the Mahoney committee as well,
while this is also being done?
Right. Absolutely. So we did discuss that, and it's not going to be
something we post on the website, and then we just cross our fingers and hope
that people respond to it. There will be outreach.
And so there was one, an outfit, I won't say the name right now, that
we had talked about at the committee where they
definitely have interest. We will reach out to them and ask them to come
in to meet with us and have a discussion.
So it's not that we don't want them, it's just that there may be a handful of
others that would want to come in and have that same opportunity.
And as we're in an exploratory phase now, it seems we're kind of
taking a step back, and we're back to an exploratory phase.
There's really no harm in talking to people, and we should talk to several
people, in my opinion.
Thank you very much. Can I ask the councilors if you want to react to
that?
Madam Mayor, didn't we just decide that the better way to operate this, because
it's not just a financial decision, is through the committee chair and the
people that he thinks have the expertise on the committee to do the
initial inquiry and talking,
rather than the Finance Committee taking the responsibility for it?
Right. Well, you heard me say that, I
think at this point, the entire Mahoney committee needs to hear from people, not
just the Finance Committee.
Well, to do some preliminary inquiry and tracking down and
figuring out the requirements.
Right.
One thing I think we're going to find out is that the Mahoney
building,
right now, it's not enough of a historic
landmark to get tax credits. I think there's more things, and that's a pretty
mechanical thing that can be figured out very quickly.
You don't have to wait four weeks for-
This councilor is in favor of getting good information from
experienced people as quickly as we can.
Yeah.
Almost no matter how we do it, but I also, when I
think about how municipalities work,
and fairness, and the fact that putting out some information
could bring in people,
an expert we've never heard of from a different state, for example, who may
have some good ideas, I'm not against that.
I kind of want it all. That's my opinion.
Anyone else?
Yes. Well, I just-
Well, I just have to point out, listening to some of the things that are coming
from the staff,
Craig Piper served on the Facilities Committee.
I don't take your meaning.
And no one raised that that was a real problem-
Oh
... because he sat on the Facilities Committee for two years and helped decide
that he shouldn't be the architect.
Well, and I thought of another rather large and important committee in
our city that also-
Yeah
... I was thinking about through that lens.
If the council's comfortable with someone that has a vested interest in making a
decision as to what the project should look like, that's your call.
That raises red flags for me.
Councilor Scott. Thank you, Scott.
I think that in this initial
information-gathering phase,
I don't see that there's any harm in an RFI.
I think it does sort of check a public notice box, so I
think that that's something that can go alongside.
I think in this information-gathering phase, it does make sense for
as many people and groups who are interested in this to have as many
conversations that hopefully culminates in one
or two or three or more presentations to the
Mahoney committee and/or potentially council about
what could, well, probably the committee first, about what could potentially be.
It is inappropriate for an interested party, I think, to
then work on and develop an RFQ or an RFP or
even a further RFI. But I think that having those
conversations, whether or not they serve on the subcommittee
specifically or attend a subcommittee as sort of a presenter, I
think is a little bit up to that committee.
And I think we should let
the chair of the Mahoney committee sort of
set forth that kind of a subcommittee and have those conversations,
and
get some of that information to keep churning through this
conversation. I think it's just a little early for us to sort
of try to reset this course right now.
So that's my thinking. And part of it is bringing in
some of those ideas and thoughts I think will help us
understand maybe where it would be helpful to
be flexible. I mean, it's just reading this bullet point about
whether programming for City Hall assessing in Hamlin Building and/or library
services is appropriate for a location entirely within a renovated Mahoney
building, or to be partially located in a renovated Mahoney and partially
in a new building addition to Mahoney. I mean, all this sort of stuff.
And then I think the paragraph that was added that I appreciate is
notwithstanding the sort of specific restrictions or the
specific kind of reservations of city staff
is that the committee should be empowered to explore alternative arrangements,
public-private partnerships, as we have discussed,
that may result in a portion of the Mahoney building
and/orOur property and or building being utilized
as commercial space, either entire library or all city services being located
elsewhere on or off the property. So I think there's a lot of extra
fodder for creative discussion.
So I like where this is going. I'm just not quite ready to
sort of fully edit the
committee's charter and then sort of be back here in two to three weeks
editing it again because we have some other information that we want to go forward
with. I don't know if that gets to anywhere, but
Well...
All right. Yes, Councilor Walker.
I actually really like what you just said.
I think that makes a lot of sense to...
I think doing kind of like a yes and approach gets
at doing an RFI,
checks the public transparency box, and gets
at your, I kind of want to do everything.
If we can also have
as many resident-facing
people making the decisions in terms of the finance
subcommittee,
I think that is the most important thing.
Because I think that for me, one of the things I've been thinking about
is there is,
I believe,
a misperception. It might not even be the right word,
but there's a myth that this is just new city offices,
and I think that the more we can have residents involved in
all of these key decision points, including as many
resident experts from the Mahoney subcommittee involved in that
RFI vetting and then hearing that information, it really kind of
helps counteract that narrative. That's the word I wanted, was narrative.
Counteract that narrative. So I think that we kind of
do both. Councilor West's proposal in terms of
the
chair and adding additional resident committee members
to that finance subcommittee or their own thing with the RFI.
As long as we can move the RFI forward as quickly as possible, I think that is my
big thing is four weeks. I am
woefully ignorant on the RFI process, but I would love to see
it shortened up quite a bit so that we can start getting bodies in the
door, even if it could be...
Can it be a revolving RFI?
And we could do rounds.
Scott shaking his-
Okay. Yeah, that would be what I would like to see.
Okay. I'm definitely going to have to rewatch this one.
Anyone else?
All right.
We might have to recap it quick, rewatch it quick so you can tell me what the
outcome of this was.
Yes. Well,
that's another opportunity to plug how important SBC TV
is or SCTV is. So-
I guess I'll just put my two cents in-
Yes, please
... if city manager needs more guidance, because I'm hearing very similar things
from Councilor Scott, Councilor Walker, and Councilor West that I will throw in
with them to make it four councilors and say I agree with pretty much
how Councilor Walker put it.
I think we can do it all.
So what I have is we want to know what is the cost of the Mahoney project now
without the PD, and what would the impact of
historic tax credits have on both the project
and historic preservation of the building and financing.
That the chair would form a subcommittee, not the funding planning committee, to
review public-private partnership, but there would be an RFI
issued to invite folks in in relatively short order,
whoever wanted to come in and talk to them about it.
We'd ask if the stretch code adds costs, and if so, what?
There's
one thing I thought I forgot to write down, but it was in my head.
Did I capture-
I told you I'm going to have to rewatch the tape.
It is hard to...
No, I think you...
I'm just trying to think of anything else. Well, did you...
Yes, I think what is implied is, well, maybe I
only not hear this because it was my thing, which is keeping
in mind the historic
importance and potentially how that historic importance
is going to be able to serve the projects by a developer taking the
credit. So-
Yeah. That's what he just said last
But he did say that. Okay, see? I've lost the ability to hear anything.
Yes.
I would also offer that I think that is language that may make
sense to go into a sort of amended order
as opposed to sort of, I think this is a very distinct, like, what are we going to
do in the very near future? I think Scott's got a great list of kind of quick next
steps.
Mm-hmm.
I see the historic preservation focus-
Yes
... as maybe more of an order amendment-
... that we get into.
It's not process.
Yeah.
You're right. Thank you.
Yes.
Just one, Scott. I was going through his list.
If I heard it right, the part about the historic preservation credit,
I think that evolves after talking to some other people, because different-
Mm-hmm
... people are going to have different ideas-
... about how to proceed and what to do and how much it's going to be and what the
benefit will be, and so-
Okay
... I think it's more the first one,
and then we'll pursue information about
historic tax credits through
the committee and the committee chair and the finance committee,
and then
et cetera, like that. Go that way.
And then the second-
All right.
Do we have
at least 85% clarity on what was said and what
was agreed to?And it
almost sounds like it was kind of a collaborative
process that got us there. Yes?
That's what a workshop-
Duh.
Should be, hopefully.
All right. So are we closing the workshop?
Ooh, actually, don't we have a public comment round in a workshop?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Okay.
Polishing.
Anyone?
Anyone wanna jump in with a comment?
Oh, come on, Charlie, you know you want to.
Charlie Teague, Pleasantdale. I don't wanna throw cold water on this.
Oh.
I
love old buildings.
When I was a little kid, they tore down the train stations on
either side of Portland, and I grieved it then,
and I had no idea what that
was all about. But,
Mahoney seems to be...
When I think about
South Portland being a middle-class-friendly
community, and I think about the $200
million, and I
just think
maybe we've created an invisible edifice
of this
really cheap Yankee
mindset that
has kept our taxes reasonable and have
created an environment in which people can stay
and, buy property and, enjoy
the appreciation of its value
instead of getting forced out of our properties
and having to turn them over to large
corporations that build giant,
high-density housing,
and you don't get to own anything.
And so I'm just thinking, maybe
it's
a nice-to-have,
but
for middle-class people,
we don't always have the capacity to buy the
Cadillac.
Maybe we gotta have a two-year-old car or
we make choices that
kinda lead us in that direction.
My
mother used to call her house in Portland a
white elephant because her parents had given
her a really good deal on it.
But the
idea of the white elephant, you're aware of
what a white elephant is?
Money pit.
Yeah.
30 seconds.
Yeah. The
sultan gave his entourage that he
wanted to get rid of, he'd give them this fabulous white elephant
that would bankrupt him.
Anyways,
thank you.
That's where my mind's been roaming around.
Thank you.
Jeff Steinberg, Cottage Road. Didn't realize we'd have a chance to talk, but I
have been thinking while you were
talking, that about 12 hours ago today,
I went to Biddeford
observing the speed limit-
To meet a guy I had been an undergraduate
with
almost 100 years ago.
And I haven't been back to that small liberal arts
college in
more than 50 years.
But that
cluster of buildings, that campus, a word I still want to cling to when we talk
about Mahoney,
I can retrace that whole
Monopoly board.
And I've been to, had a chance to count,
there are six college campuses, university campuses, that have really been
important to me in the course of my life.
And each one of them has a place in my
geography and in my heart.
And what I guess I'm trying to say with this is, buildings and the way
we arrange them and the way we move around in them, these are living things.
They create memories. They hold memories. They make for friendships.
They allow for
the kind of civic
togetherness that not everything does.
And driving back through a place like, not to pick on it, Scarborough,
there's lots of there there, but there's not really a there there in Scarborough.
And Mahoney and the park gives us a chance, it
seems to me,
in South Portland to have a real there there.
Now, the danger is that the there becomes, well, it's in District One,
and it's not in district you-name-a-number between
two and five. But I think the way to get around that is to recognize
how dear our neighborhoods are to us, how important they
are to us, and try to weave into the fabric of whatever it is we build,
a sense of those neighborhoods, and a representation of the
quality of those lived experiences.
It also seems to me that what we're doing with Mahoney is really
moving the idea of a campus inside.
So what we might once have imagined, and maybe I hope still will have a chance to
imagine, as an expanseis now
becoming, I think,
a challenge to imagine how-
30 seconds
... we can incorporate a lot of those campusy
values, options, in the space of this one building.
So embrace the library and bring it in. Make it the people's building.
Announce that to the people by giving them, for instance, a library on
the first floor. And make the rest of the second
floor a place where public business is done, and have
a gym.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else?
All right. Public comment on the workshop item is closed.
Council, all right then. I think we're ready to look at action
on old and new business. Are we ready to tackle...
Well, you can read the order, but are we ready to tackle it?
Order 157, 2526, amending order number 135,
2425 to update the charge of the Mahony
City Center Committee, which was postponed on March 19th, 2026.
Passage requires a majority vote.
Thank you very much. I have a council question, which is, have I
opened the right one?
The one labeled Alternative Order Number
157.
So yeah, if you're looking for the order, yes.
Alternative Order Number 157, proposed new order for council to pass.
That's the one.
Oh, okay.
Because things changed since we originally had proposed this, and so that
order reflects those changes.
So for clarification on this one, all I'm seeing is a little bit of red,
basically to remove police and fire. All right.
Question from Counselor Scott.
Oh, sorry. I was going to make a motion, but do you want to ask questions first?
Does anybody-
There really is a problem because it's Alternative Order
157-2526, but when you open it, the
document is entitled Amended Order 135,
2425.
Okay. Well, we could fix that.
Yes. On our new system, things are not opening
quite as attractively as I would
like them, but I can still see this.
I mean, it is very confusing, all these attachments, but we're really trying to
look at the one that has red lines, right?
Yeah.
Right.
And there's only one that has red lines, right?
Right. That's the one I'm looking at. Yay, me.
And see how there's a difference between what's on the
agenda and what the document says?
Yeah, that is an issue.
Okay. So Alternative Order-
So I don't know what the hell we're doing
... 157.
So why did you put it over till we
That's what Counselor Scott was going to say a minute ago.
That's what I was thinking, too.
I think Counselor Scott wanted to postpone it.
Are we once again going to punt on this?
I think so. It sounded like that from our discussion in
workshop, that we did not feel we were necessarily-
Yeah
... ready to formally amend this, that we wanted to do a little bit more
investigatory work first, and also informally tell
police and fire they did not need to attend.
Yep.
I heard that.
So if that's a motion to postpone, I'll second it.
Motion to postpone. Using those words, in all
seriousness.
Oh, yes, to a date certain.
Yeah. With the date certain, we want to do it the next-
Mm-hmm
... business meeting of the council.
Sure. Yes.
Which is not going to-
The 21st.
Okay. That is... Oh.
Complaining.
It's all right.
Oh, well.
Mm.
All right. Well-
Wait, what did we say? I missed it.
Complaining.
Pop the popcorn.
Oh, no.
Anyone who's coming.
Maybe the first one in May.
Yeah, let's do the first one in May, because that will also give time for the RFI
process to start working its way out, and-
So we may have-
... the Mahony Committee to meet again
... some clearer ideas.
Yes.
Fine.
Yay. Another collaborative decision. Do we need to vote on this, however?
Yeah.
I think we do.
So I think I heard a motion to postpone-
You did
... to the first meeting in May.
May.
And I'll second that motion.
Seconding the motion.
Did you want to say anything about it?
I already did.
Did you?
All right. All in favor of the
postponement? Yay. Six of the six.
All right. We're moving to the next, the second item,
which is ordinance 20.
Madam Clerk, please.
Ordinance number 20, 2526, amending Chapter 4, Bicycles, of the Code of
Ordinances, to update the definition of a bicycle and add the definition of an
electric bicycle to better align with the state definitions.
This is a first reading, and passage requires a majority vote.
So the next three ordinance, this one and the other two, all have to
do with the workshop that you recently held, where
at the request of the Bike Ped Committee,
essentially updating the definition of bicycles to align with the State of
Maine's definition. Which effectively permits Class I
and II E-bikes on city properties, including the Greenbelt,
and so there were three areas that Corporation Council
identified as needing updates. As you saw during the workshop, they've now been
put in the formal
ordinance amendment form for, in this case, Chapter 4, but then
as you'll see in the next two chapters, 15 and then Chapter
18. So all three will need to be amended in order to
effectively update those definitions.
So
you're now being asked to update Chapter 4, and which we recommend.
Okay.
Do we have questions?
No, we do not have questions. Do we have comments?
Doesn't look like we have comments.
What is the wish of the council?
Move for passage.
Seconded.
On the first read.
It's Walker and Coleman.
Mm-hmm. All right. Any comments?
I think this is a great idea, and I'm really glad we're doing it.
Okay. Yay. Councilor Coleman?
Nope.
No?
Good idea.
Okay.
Let's go.
Anyone else?
Nope. We don't need a roll call. All in favor?
That is a unanimous vote of the council on this first read.
Next, ordinance number 22. Thank you.
Ordinance number 21-25-26-
Oops
... amending Chapter 15 for motor vehicles and traffic with the code of
ordinances to update the definition of bicycle. First reading.
Passage requires majority vote.
Okay.
Same speech, just Chapter 15 this time.
All right. Questions? Now who's rushing?
No questions. Any comments?
I actually have a question.
Oh, question.
And I hate to do this, but is it just a typo that they all say
25-25 in the-
Yes.
Okay.
We experienced a technical issue with the new system.
Oh.
And some of our changes did not save.
That's a real surprise.
It was a very frustrating Thursday.
You type a whole position paper, come back, it'd be gone.
Ugh. Geez.
Oh, no.
Oh. Three times, maybe.
Mm-hmm.
Oh.
That is horrendous.
Causes-
I want my money back.
Yeah, really.
I emailed their service people that-
Yeah
... we want a refund.
Ugh. All right. Well, that was a fun interlude.
Sorry.
So, okay, that was your question. Comments? No comments.
Do we have someone who is willing to motion?
I do.
Thank you, Councilor Walker. A second?
I'm looking at that table. You guys are on vacation over there.
I'll second that.
Sure.
Councilor Pride. Councilor Walker, no comments?
Nope.
Councilor Pride?
Let her ride.
Thank you. Any other comments? Any other comments?
I do not see any.
What is our vote? All in favor. Six of
six. Thank you very much. Now we're on 22.
Ordinance number 22-25-26 amending Chapter 18
of the code of ordinances to remove the prohibition of Class 1 and Class 2 electric
bicycles from operating on city property and other miscellaneous
updates. First reading. Passage requires a majority vote.
Thank you. Questions?
I don't see any questions. Comments from the public?
Don't see any of those either.
Oh,
I'm just seeing if I have any questions. No, we talked about this to death.
Any motions? I mean a motion for passage.
I've got my hand up.
Thank you, Councilor Coleman. Second?
Councilor Walker. Thank you. Any comments from the
motioners?
Nope.
Okay. All in favor? Yay.
Six of six. Thank you. Now we're on ordinance
23.
Ordinance 23-25-26 amending Chapter 2, Administration and Legislation
for miscellaneous amendments for Public Arts Committee. First reading.
Passage requires a majority vote.
This is a change to the definition
of public art in Public Arts Committee that was
discussed and brought forward. Unfortunately,
the staff in the committee, and planning as well, are not here.
But this is a straightforward definition change for them based
on the title of their committee being Public Arts.
They wanted to expand their definition to include performance and production
pieces, and those are the changes that you can see outlined there.
Happy to answer any other questions.
Councilors, do you have questions? Oops, sorry.
Questions over here?
All right.
Comments, public folks?
Somebody's thinking about it but probably refraining.
Okay.
Councilors, the will of the council.
Do we want to move for passage? We're going to give it to Councilor Scott.
Thank you.
Second?
Councilor Coleman.
Sure.
Councilor Scott?
Just very much appreciate the update, and it's funny when you think,
"Why wasn't that in there before?"
Before. Yeah.
So it's wonderful to see, and I look forward to all of the new public
art that we've now just discovered.
Yay us. Who knew music is art
and performance. All right. Anyone else? That was my comment.
Nope. All right. All in favor?
Yes, six of six. Thank you.
Ordinance number 24-25-26 amending
Chapter 2, Administration and Legislation, for the repeal language of the Transit
Advisory Committee. First reading.
Mm-hmm.
Passage requires a majority vote.
This came from your March 10th workshop following the Metro
presentation of our one-year anniversary from the merger.
And the advice was we've reached a point that the Transit
Advisory can be dissolved.
Mm-hmm.
Members were all notified and aware of this upcoming piece, and
we do have resident representation as part of our Metro board.
And I'm happy to answer any other questions.
Thank you very much for reminding us of all those important things.
Mm-hmm.
Councilors, do you have questions?
Public, do you have comments?
Councilors, does somebody want to move for passage?
Thank you, Councilor Walker. Does someone want to second?
I'll second.
Councilor Pride. Councilor Walker.
I just want to thank all of the members of the-
Mm-hmm
... Transit Advisory Committee for their service and
all the hard work they did to help us get us through the merger.
Yep.
Well said. Councilor Pride?
I agree. Thank you very much for the hard work.
Thank you. And thank you. I just wanted to add thanks to our clerk who's done
quite a bit of work on this as well.
All right. All in favor?Six
of six. Thank you very much. That is a first.
No. Yeah, that is a first read.
It is our first read.
So we'll see it one more time. Okay, next.
Order 177-25-26, Approving a Property Abatement
Request for Case 2602. Passage requires majority vote.
Okay, thank you.
Did we change the language appropriately and all of those good
things?
So Chris had sent us some, our social services director sent us some
updated numbers to insert into the order to make them
reflective, assuming council still wants to proceed with providing the
abatement.
Okay.
Jessica, you got copied on those, too. Is that correct?
Yes.
Okay.
All right. And we don't
do comments on this, so I think
we need a motion.
Thank you, Councilor Walker. Anyone seconding?
Everyone's gone into a coma. What are you thinking of? Hello? Are you seconding?
Was there a change that needed to be made to this order?
Yeah.
Okay.
That's what we just asked.
The change has been sent. We sort of are trusting it's
going to be made, and we're voting for the changed.
Okay.
The edited. Okay.
I'll second.
Thank you. Thank you. Any-
I was voting already.
We don't really say anything. All right. All in favor?
So-
Whoa.
Sorry.
Yes.
Can I ask a question? I just want to...
Well, no, the information is public.
Ish.
Is there a way just to confirm
my understanding that we are bringing this up to a certain point, but
it's not a full abatement, right? As we-
Correct. You're right.
Okay. And that number is the-
You're not abating the-
Mm-hmm
... the two years. You're abating the years-
Prior
... that were requested prior to that.
Yes. Okay. Thank you. Just want to-
Yep.
You know.
Yeah. You should know what you're voting for.
Yeah. Sometimes.
Okay.
Thank you.
All right.
I'm happy to.
Are we in favor of this? All right. Thank you so much.
Six of six again. All right, next.
Thank you. Item number eight.
Order 178, Authorizing the City to Submit a Letter to Maine Department of
Environmental Protection regarding the Renewal of the Portland Pipeline Corporation
Oil Terminal Facility License. Passage requires a majority vote.
Okay. Councilors, did you have questions? You were all able to see the letter?
Mm-hmm.
Any questions?
No.
Very
pleased-
Oh, good
... for clarification for the amounts of money that they...
Because it doesn't seem realistic at this
point.
Okay. Good.
We aim to please around here.
Good. Yeah.
All right.
We already had one person publicly comment about this quite
early on.
Yeah.
Might have been even yesterday, but no. Just seems that way.
No more comments? All right. Can we have a motion for passage,
please?
Councilor West? Thank you. Seconded?
Councilor Coleman, Councilor West?
No comment. It's a good letter. Thank you.
Yes.
All right. Well,
Councilor Coleman, you've made your comments pretty much.
Yes.
Yes? All right. All in favor?
And that is another vote of six of six, or
was it only five and a half?
Councilor Scott, did you vote in favor?
Yes.
Thank you. Thank you very much. All right.
Now we're at our favorite part of the meeting. We get gifts and donations.
Order number 179-25-26, Acceptance of Gifts and Donations.
Passage requires majority vote. This evening, we just have a small donation to our
heating fund for $50 from Sarah Randall.
Well, that was very nice. Oops, making comments.
I have no questions, but
anyone else, comments?
No, don't see any comments or questions.
Move for passage?
I'll move for passage.
Thank you, Councilor Pride. Seconded by Councilor
West. Councilor Pride?
Well, I'm glad this is happening, because
in an interesting turn of events, the president has
suggested removing funding of LIHEAP to fund the war in
Iran.
Oh, yeah.
Which it's not like people will need that money for heating oil because of the
war in Iran or anything.
Anyway, that's my comment. Thank you.
Which is up to $5.20.
Yeah.
Thank you. Councilor West-
I know
... were you the second?
Yes, and I just appreciate my colleague's comments.
I won't add any more.
All right. All in favor?
Six of six. All right.
Citizen discuss- Well, public discussion.
Public discussion. Anyone need to make public comment on anything?
Oh, we have a returned attorney.
Yeah. Charlie Keaney from Pleasantdale.
I
want to add my speculation as to why the Portland
Pipeline is
only using 3% of its capacity.
I just did a quick Google search. I know that's
suspect, the answer's there, but it still says the St.
Lawrence Seaway closes every year in
January
to shipping. So, and we're seeing
geopolitical events can
affect oil
availability.
This is a good time to
reinforce
that thought in our minds.
So,
andFrom my perspective, I think
they're a good
neighbor.
If you compare it to the smells that are coming
out of Sprague and
Global,
and we want to talk about needing
revenue, I don't know how much revenue they give us.
I don't know what's in this letter either. Where can I find that?
That's my question.
Well, if you go to the city website and you... You know what?
Maybe I could email it to you.
But it is part of our agenda.
Okay.
It's linked, but yeah.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Okay, anybody else
making public comment? I don't see anyone else wanting to make public
comment. Let's call that closed.
All right, thank you. Mr. City Manager.
Pass.
Oh, wow.
Didn't see that one coming. All right.
Councilors, anything you'd like to say in our round robin
opportunity? Councillor West.
Sorry, everybody. I know it's late.
I wanted to talk about the house at 101 Cottage Road.
That is the house that's next to the
Pratt & Abbott dry cleaning.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
And you may have noticed that it's a very deteriorated house with a hole in the
roof. It's abandoned. An interesting situation, since
1997,
the state
prohibited any residential use of that house because of the contamination from the
adjacent dry cleaner. In 2008, there was still somebody
living there. They issued another order. Since 2008, it's been abandoned.
I've had
just some informal back and forth with the...
Actually, not back and forth, just me asking the
staff to try to take action to
get that property,
to get it torn down, because it really needs to be.
It can't be used for a residence. It's in a part of our
community that we would like to have looking nice, and it's just
a derelict, vacant structure.
In the absence of any action, there is a procedure in our
code where 10 residents or an official,
like myself, can file a petition, a nuisance petition with the city,
and then it's up to... There's a process to go through, and then it will
eventually come to the city council.
I would really hope that the city could work with the property owner, which is
Pratt & Abbott, they own that parcel-
Oh, they do
... to try to get it torn down
in a voluntary way.
But I am going to be working on that and proceeding with that, and I just wanted to
alert everybody, because it's a little bit different from coming forth with a
workshop request, and
so that's that for tonight.
Thank you. Anyone else for round robin tonight?
I just want to comment that
fraud,
yeah, residential property fraud, people who
somehow get ahold of your deed, is on the
rise in New England, and it's happened in Maine just recently to a
friend. And this person actually came in and was
talking to the assessor thinking that that's how the procedure
went so that you would be alerted if there was somebody
who was making a request on your property.
And you can do it through Cumberland County, or you can do it
through... The site I used had a government address, which
was the Register of Deeds in Portland.
And you just go in, and it is a little funky in
that when you sign up to do it,
it gives all of the different counties and different states.
So just scroll down to Cumberland.
And you don't have to know what your property number, again, it's done by name.
And so you will be alerted with an email,
and also sometimes a letter. I did an email,
so that if there's any action on any of your parcels, your property,
you will be alerted. That doesn't mean it's going to have a good outcome,
but the quicker you know, the better your chances that you
can put a stop to what's happening.
So it's a new scam,
and... It's not a new scam. It's been around, but there's been more
violations in New England. And I have a friend
who
was pursuing knowledge about that.
And so
yeah, do that for yourself, for your title of deed to be
secure. And if anything,
if another party attempts to buy
property, sell property that is of yours, you'll be alerted.
Thank you. That's interesting information.
Did you want to say anything, Councillor Scott?
I was going good.
I just wanted to acknowledge that the school budgeting
situation this year has been very difficult, and
there are complicated decisions being made,
and I know it is not easy for the
administration or the school board members or
staff, some of whom are losing their jobs,
or the parents of young children. And
my hope is that people can have patience with one another, that
good information can be brought forward quickly to be
sorted through, and that
a week from today, we will see the school budget in here to
discuss the... Excuse me, the school
members here to discuss a budget that the school
board has approved.
That is my comment.
All right. I have
been asking you guys to help me adjourn this meeting, but recently I've read that
I think I can just do it. I think I can just do it on my own.
So, this meeting is adjourned. Thank you.
Aw.
Hey, bud. It was kind of
long,
but